^^^^^^^^^^LEO TOLSTOY:  THE AUTHOR AND HIS TIMES   Leo Tolstoy was a man of many parts--soldier, sensualist,country nobleman, writer, teacher and social critic, and, notleast, benevolent patriarch.  Photographs taken of him in hislater years show a fearsome-looking man with long hair and aflowing beard, dressed in peasant's clothes, surrounded by hiswife and children.  In writing his panoramic novels of Russianlife, Tolstoy drew heavily on his varied experiences.  Indeed,he gave to some of his central characters, as in Anna Karenina,his own thoughts and feelings, which were sometimes, as you'llsee, contradictory.   Leo (or Lev) Nikolayevich, Count Tolstoy was born near Moscowon August 28 (September 9, New Style), 1828, into an oldaristocratic family that for generations had been in the Czar'sinner circle.  Orphaned at nine, he was raised and educated byan aunt.  In 1844 he entered the University of Kazan where hewas greatly influenced by the writings of the 18th-centuryFrench philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who espoused thevirtues of nature and a simple life.  He left the university in1847 without obtaining a degree.   Tolstoy then spent time carousing and hunting.  Because hewas awkward and not as handsome as some of the other youngnobles in his social circle, he was nicknamed "Lyvochka thebear." We know from his diaries that Tolstoy was divided againsthimself:  Although he devoted himself fully to having a wildtime, he felt guilty about it.  But he couldn't determine thesource of his guilty feelings.  Although he believed in God, hehad no patience for organized religion and the rules it imposedon life (he was later excommunicated for his views by theRussian Orthodox Church).   Fed up with city life, Tolstoy went back to Yasnaya Polyana(Clear Glade), his family's ancestral estate near Moscow.  Hisplan was to become a farmer and devote himself to improving thelot of peasants.  He developed a system whereby he would sellpeasants small pieces of land year by year, so that they, too,would be property owners and have a personal stake in theproductivity of Yasnaya Polyana.  Although the peasants likedhim personally, they couldn't understand why a nobleman wouldtry to help them, and so they distrusted his efforts.  Terriblydisappointed, Tolstoy went to Moscow, where he spent two moreyears (1848-1850) living the high life.  His diaries show arestless, searching young man who gambled and played with womenby night, and then chastised himself by day.  He began to writeduring this time and in 1852 published Childhood, a reminiscencethat received good reviews.  He later wrote Boyhood (1854) andYouth (1856).   Perhaps in another burst of restlessness, Tolstoy in 1851followed one of his brothers, Nicholas, by volunteering for thearmy; he served in the Caucasus fighting Tatar guerrillas.  Hecontinued to write and in 1854-1856 published SevastopolSketches.  These accounts of the Crimean War (in which Russiafought Turkey, England, France, and Sardinia) catapulted Tolstoyto the front rank of contemporary Russian writers.   He left the army in 1855 and went to Saint Petersburg, theRussian capital, where the literary community welcomed him.  ButTolstoy had no patience for the intellectuals he found there orfor their urbane, middle-class views.  He had one dispute afteranother, the most famous of which was with Ivan Turgenev, thenthe recognized master of the Russian literary scene.  Tolstoydisagreed with his fellow writers basically because as aSlavophile--an admirer of Slavic, and especially Russianculture--he didn't share their enchantment with Western Europeannotions of progress.   Tolstoy then traveled extensively in Europe, visiting France,Switzerland, Germany, Italy, and England.  (He spoke French,German, and English.) A major reason for his travels was tostudy European systems of education, about which he haddeveloped a keen interest.  His exposure to European ways,however, made him feel all the more strongly that Russia was acase apart and could not look to the West to help it realize itsdestiny.   In 1859, Tolstoy started a school at Yasnaya Polyana for thechildren of his peasants.  Convinced that refined,European-style education killed youthful exuberance, he dideverything possible to nurture his pupils' spontaneity andcuriosity.   In 1860, Tolstoy's brother Nicholas died of tuberculosis.Tolstoy was deeply affected by his death and later re-created itin Anna Karenina, when he described the death of Levin'sbrother, also named Nicholas.  Like Levin--the novel's hero,whose life he patterned on his own--Tolstoy immersed himself inthe affairs of his estate as a way of alleviating his emotionalpain.   In 1862, Tolstoy married Sofya (Sonya) Andreyevna Behrs, thedaughter of a prominent Moscow physician.  Then began the mostproductive period of his life.  He wrote War and Peace,considered one of the world's great novels, from 1864 to 1869.He completed Anna Karenina, another masterpiece, in 1876, whileproducing a series of short stories, as well as essays onreligion, art, and social subjects.   In his books Tolstoy, like most writers, used material fromhis personal experiences as well as from the world around him.This is very evident in Anna Karenina.  He had wanted for sometime to write "a novel of contemporary life," as he put it.Marriage, an enduring theme in his work, would be a centralconcern.  So, too, would adultery.  Tolstoy had recently had anaffair with one of his peasants and had abandoned the child ofthis union.  He felt extremely guilty, and you can sense thisclearly in Anna Karenina.  Tolstoy got the idea for the novel'sending and its heroine's first name from the suicide in 1872 ofAnna Stepanovna Pirogova, the betrayed common-law wife of one ofTolstoy's neighbors, who threw herself under a train.  Tolstoyhad known Anna Stepanovna and went to the autopsy following herdeath.  You'll note his passion for close observation in thestartlingly exact description of Anna Karenina's suicide.   Tolstoy was not only an artist of high standards but also aman continually struggling with spiritual matters.  This, too,comes across in Anna Karenina.  Levin's struggles and visionaryprojects in the novel are similar to Tolstoy's.  Levin'smarriage to Kitty and his happiness in their domestic lifereflect Tolstoy's marriage to Sonya and their happy first yearstogether.  He based the character of Kitty on Sonya.   Anna Karenina is a towering achievement because Tolstoysucceeded not only in presenting a panoramic picture of his era,but because he dealt with aspects of human nature that aretimeless.  You can find people throughout history with problemssimilar to Anna's desperation and guilt, Karenin's fear ofintimacy, Vronsky's struggle to keep himself from beingsmothered by Anna's possessiveness.  Most readers considerTolstoy one of the great masters at drawing psychologicalportraits of people.  The insights about human nature you willgain by reading Anna Karenina will probably help you understandthe people around you.   Tolstoy's later books reflect a man becoming increasinglyconservative and religious.  In The Kreutzer Sonata (1889), anovel, Tolstoy describes marriage as a wasteland, and sexualrelations--even between husband and wife--as essentially evil.In another novel, Resurrection (1899-1900), he violently attackscivilization and argues strongly in favor of an ascetic way oflife.  A Confession (1882) is a detailed account of Tolstoy'storturous coming to terms with religion.   We know from his diaries and from his children'sreminiscences that as an old man Tolstoy wanted to leave hisfamily to go off and die alone in the mountains, as religiousascetics before him had done.  But the death of his youngest sonin 1895 so affected his wife Sonya that he dared not leave her.In his last years, Tolstoy's memory faltered seriously and hesuffered fainting spells, after which he would frequently askfor relatives who had died decades before.  On November 20,1910, a month after one of these attacks, he died at the trainstation in the small town of Astapovo, after having finallydecided to flee from Yasnaya Polyana.   All his life Tolstoy had been a combatant, a swimmer againstthe tide.  He was at odds with his social class on matters oflifestyle, on priorities in education, on the emancipation ofthe serfs (which he strongly favored), and in his belief thatRussia must avoid industrialization and Western models ofprogress.  He was progressive as an educator, in many ways aheadof his time as a writer, and visionary as a political thinker.Yet he opposed women's rights and became a religious ascetic,patterning himself after such thinkers as Lao-tzu, the ancientChinese philosopher.   It has been said that Tolstoy's novels have more sweep thanthose of any other author in the history of literature.  LeoTolstoy, it could be said, was many men and inhabited manyworlds in his lifetime.  He acknowledged that he never totallyresolved the contradictions between his ideals and the way inwhich he lived.  But he forged those struggles into a singularbody of literary work.  His novels are masterpieces that readerscontinue to find exciting and relevant. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THE PLOT   Anna Karenina has two parallel plots rather than one storyline.  Tolstoy builds his book on the personal quests of Annaand Levin, his two principal characters.  For much of the book,their paths are separate; in fact, they don't meet until the endof the book, when the differences between them are especiallyglaring.   The book begins with a domestic crisis.  Stiva, Anna'sbrother, has been caught again cheating on his wife.  Anna isable to convince Dolly, her sister-in-law, to forgive Stiva.   At this point, the beautiful and charming Anna appears as akind and generous woman.  She is married to Karenin, ahigh-ranking government official.  Relations between them seemstable, polite if not passionate.   But then Anna meets, and falls in love with, the young CountVronsky.  She tries to avoid him, but he will not give up.  Theyhave a torrid affair, and she becomes pregnant.  Unable to livea life of duplicity, she confesses to her husband.  Karenininsists that Anna and he go on living as though nothing werewrong.  In that way, he says, they will not be criticized andgossiped about by society, whose censure--or, worse,ridicule--he fears.  But Anna continues to see Vronsky on thesly.  When Karenin finds out, he investigates the ways in whichhe might obtain a divorce.   Anna falls gravely ill after giving birth to Vronsky'sdaughter.  Karenin, however, at what he thinks is her deathbed,forgives her everything.  Anna, delirious with fever, swearsthat all she wants is to be at peace with Karenin, that he isthe one she loves.   Vronsky, who is also at Anna's bedside, is humiliated inKarenin's presence.  Desperately afraid that Anna will soon die,he shoots himself.  But he doesn't die, and neither, at thistime, does Anna.  Karenin realizes that he had, in fact, hopedfor her death.  Confronted with her living reality, he is unableto summon the forgiving feelings he felt so strongly at herbedside.  When Anna goes back to Vronsky, he refuses a divorceand custody of their son, Seriozha.  Anna then goes to Italywith Vronsky.   Anna, who is now abandoned by her former friends andacquaintances, finds herself condemned to a life of lonelinessand idleness.  Vronsky, however, as an unmarried man, escapessociety's censure; he's free to come and go as he pleases, anddoes so.  Anna becomes increasingly neurotic and fearful.  Sheconvinces herself that Vronsky loves someone else, when, infact, he is as much in love with her as ever.  There is a lot oftension beneath the surface and they quarrel frequently.   Anna, neither Vronsky's wife nor merely his mistress, dependsentirely on his love for her peace of mind.  But this love isn'tenough for her; no one, at this point, could satisfy Anna'semotional needs.  After a particularly bitter argument withVronsky, she takes her life.   Parallel with, and in sharp contrast to, Anna's story is thestory of Levin and his pure love (in Tolstoy's view).  Levin, awealthy landowner, comes to town to propose to Kitty, avivacious and attractive young woman, who is--or thinks sheis--in love with Vronsky.  She refuses Levin.  Vronsky, however,once having met Anna, has no interest in any other woman.   Levin is heartbroken by Kitty's refusal.  He returns to hiscountry estate and buries himself in work.  He is writing a bookmeant to revolutionize farming practices in Russia.  He proposesthat landowners strike a 50-50 partnership with laborers.  Thatway, he reasons, the laborers will work harder because they willhave a real stake in the harvest, and everyone's profits willrise.   Kitty, meanwhile, traumatized by Vronsky's rejection, fallsill.  Her family takes her to a German spa.  There, shegradually recovers and admits that it was Levin she loved allalong.   Kitty and Levin meet sometime later.  Levin proposes again,and Kitty accepts.  They marry and later have a son.   Through his happiness with Kitty, Levin is able gradually tocome to terms with his lifelong struggle to believe in God.Kitty helps Levin to deal with the death of his brother Nicholasand his horror of death in general.   Anna's and Levin's stories veer close to each other at timesthrough such major characters as Stiva, Anna's brother, andVronsky, who was once Levin's rival for Kitty.   Thematically, the quests of Anna and Levin are contrasted.Anna's is a search for personal fulfillment through romanticlove; Levin's is one of spiritual fulfillment through marriage,family, and hard work.  Through their stories, Tolstoy attemptsto evaluate Russia's past and present and to express his visionfor its future.   Many Russian novels have large numbers of characters, andAnna Karenina is no exception.  It can be difficult to keep themall straight, especially since each Russian uses three names.  ARussian has a given name (such as Anna or Stepan); a middle namethat refers to the father (patronymic), the suffix of whichmeans either "son of" or "daughter of" (for example, AnnaArkadyevna and Stepan Arkadyevich, children of Arkady); and afamily name, which also has masculine and feminine forms (AnnaArkadyevna Oblonskaya and Stepan Arkadyevich Oblonsky).  When awoman marries, she takes the feminine form of her husband'sfamily name (Anna Arkadyevna Karenina, wife of Karenin).  Commonmasculine suffixes are -ovich, -ievich,--ich, and -ych.  Commonfeminine suffixes are -a,--ovna, -ievna, and--ishna.  (Not allEnglish translations include such suffixes.  For instance, apopular translation by Rosemary Edmonds has the title AnnaKarenin [New York:  Penguin, 1954]).  Russians also havenicknames (such as Stiva.)   The seven principal characters in Anna Karenina are Annaherself, Levin, Vronsky, Stiva (Stepan), Kitty, Dolly, andKarenin.  Each of them is considered below in an individualprofile.  To help you keep track of the others, here is a listof the major and more important minor characters in AnnaKarenina: ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THE OBLONSKY FAMILY   Prince Stepan Arkadyevich Oblonsky (Stiva), Anna's brother   Princess Darya Alexandrovna Oblonskaya (Dolly), Stiva's wife,Kitty's sister, and eldest daughter of Prince Shcherbatsky   Tanya, Grisha, Alyosha, Nikolenka, children of Stiva andDolly ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THE KARENIN FAMILY   Alexey Alexandrovich Karenin, Anna's husband   Anna Arkadyevna Karenina, Karenin's wife, Vronsky's lover,and Stiva's sister   Sergey Alexeyich Karenin (Seriozha), Anna and Alexey's son ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THE LEVIN FAMILY   Konstantin Dmitrich Levin (Kostya), Kitty's husband   Catherine Alexandrovna Levina (Kitty), Levin's wife, theyoungest daughter of Prince Shcherbatsky   Mitya, their infant son   Nicholas Levin, Kostya's brother ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THE SHCHERBATSKY FAMILY   Prince Alexander Shcherbatsky, the father of Kitty, Dolly,and Nataly   Princess Shcherbatskaya, the mother of Kitty, Dolly, andNataly ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THE VRONSKY FAMILY   Count Alexey Kirilich Vronsky, Anna's lover   Countess Vronskaya, his mother   Princess Natalie Alexandrovna Lvova, Kitty and Dolly'ssister, who lives abroad   Prince Lvov (Arseny), her husband   Mary Nikolaevna (Masha), who lives with Levin's brother   Annushka, Anna's maid   Countess Lydia Ivanovna, Karenin's friend, a mystic PrincessElizabeth Fedorovna Tverskaya (Betsy), a society lady who isespecially cruel to Anna ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  ANNA ARKADYEVNA KARENINA   Rarely in literature is a character so utterly ruined as AnnaKarenina.  Beautiful and unaffected, she becomes deceptive,jealous, and spiteful.  The change in her will probably horrifyyou, yet even when Anna is destructive she arouses yourcompassion.  In conflict with her mixed-up society, she has noresources against the turmoil within her.   She fights a magnificently tough but losing battle.  As youwill note, there are numerous angles from which to examine herdownfall.   1.  ANNA IS FATALLY FLAWED.   Following this interpretation of Anna's ruin, readersgenerally contrast her to Levin, the hero of the book.  Levinthirsts for spiritual enlightenment, while Anna seeks personalhappiness.  Levin attains his goal, Anna does not.  In herquest, Anna does not think of others.  Levin, on the other hand,is obsessed with trying to establish peace and equilibriumbetween himself and others.   Anna's quest is purely emotional, and by the end her reasonfails her.  She is described as having "an excess of feeling," atrait shared by many of the female characters in Tolstoy'sbooks.  Levin is above all lucid, as are all of Tolstoy'sheroes.  Tolstoy has often been criticized for endowing hisfemale characters with feelings that tend to overpower theirbrains.  Even Anna, arguably the most intelligent andwell-educated female character Tolstoy ever created, can't holdon to her wits.   2.  ANNA BETRAYS THE FUNCTIONS OF HER SEX.   Anna is seen in relief against two other femalecharacters--Dolly and Kitty.  The primary function of sex,believes Tolstoy, is to create children, not personal pleasure.Both Dolly and Kitty are wives and mothers before all else.Anna refuses to have children after she and Vronsky begin livingtogether.  Not only does Anna refuse her societal role, but shebreaks the natural cycle of birth-life-death.   Dolly and Kitty both make meaningful lives for themselves,Anna does not.   3.  ANNA IS A VICTIM OF HER SOCIETY.   Following the custom of her social set, Anna's marriage toKarenin was arranged by relatives.  Love--which Anna needs anddesires before all else--was never a factor in this match.There is no passion in her marriage with Karenin; their lifecontributes to Anna's emotional delicacy because it suffocatesand frustrates her.   Adultery is accepted in Anna's social circle, so long as itis carried on in the proper style.  It is understood that mosthusbands and wives have lovers, but they're expected to bediscreet.  Anna finds this hypocritical, and Vronsky, madly inlove, makes no attempt to hide it either.   Yet her society has a strong hold on Anna.  When Karenin askswhat will give her peace, she feels too guilty to say, "Todivorce you, keep our son, and live with Vronsky."   Although Anna and Vronsky retire to their own world, Anna isagain tripped up by convention.  Her friends abandon her becauseshe is "living in sin." Vronsky, though, can go where he wishes.Anna is enraged at the double standard.  Loneliness drives hernearly insane.  Reeling from the brutal treatment of her formerfriends, she's unable to believe in Vronsky's love.  Where onceher love for him was passionate and tender, it becomespossessive and vengeful.  Pathologically insecure, Anna destroysherself in order to spite Vronsky.   You could also say that neither Karenin nor Vronsky is aperfect match for Anna, for both men, in different ways, areproducts of their society.  False and corrupt, such a societycould never produce a worthy man for a woman as intelligent andhonestly passionate as Anna.   Tolstoy made no secret of his contempt for city life and"society." Anna's death--which he based on a true incident--cantherefore be seen as his way of indicting the society thatdestroyed her.   4.  ANNA REPRESENTS THE CITY.   For Tolstoy, the city denotes alienation and corruption.  Hebelieves that cities and urban values would ultimately destroyRussia.  As a woman of society, Anna embodies the sparkle,sophistication and seductiveness--as well as the depravity--ofthe city.  By destroying her, Tolstoy scores a small victory inhis battle to save Russia.   5.  ANNA REPRESENTS TOLSTOY'S DARK SIDE.   Like Anna, Tolstoy had an adulterous affair, with a peasantwoman on his estate.  And, like Anna, he abandoned the child hehad with his extramarital lover.   Tolstoy felt terrible guilt over this affair.  His deathsentence for Anna has been interpreted as a gesture ofself-loathing. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  KONSTANTIN DMITRICH LEVIN(KOSTYA)   Levin is the hero of Anna Karenina.  In fact, some readersbelieve Anna was created by Tolstoy primarily to point upLevin's superiority.  Where Anna maneuvers hysterically toachieve the perfect romance, Levin strives to find coherence inlife and death, love and work.  Anna is a portrait ofalienation; Levin finds harmony with those around him.  In Anna,you see the moral collapse of urban society; in Levin, you seeTolstoy's hopes for the future of Russia.   Levin changes during the course of the novel.  He achievesharmony in several ways:   1.  LOVE AND PASSION   Before he married, Levin had numerous sexual involvements,all merely to satisfy his youthful lustiness.  His love forKitty, however, is emotional and spiritual, as well as physical.He is entirely faithful to his wife; for them, sex has a sacredquality.  In this, Levin contrasts with Stiva, who never findssexual happiness in marriage, and with Anna, who never findsemotional security in her sexual relations.   2.  LOVE AND WORK   Levin sometimes feels overwhelmed by his responsibilities asa husband, father, landowner, and estate manager.  Yet, by theend of Anna Karenina, he realizes that his mission--working theland, sharing the proceeds with his peasants--not only provideshim income but will provide his heirs with meaningful work and afoothold in the future of Russia.   3.  INTELLECTUAL AND PHYSICAL WORK   Tolstoy did not admire Russia's urban intellectuals who, hefelt, had no understanding of, or appreciation for, thepeasants, whom he considered the backbone of the country.Levin, well-educated and himself an intellectual, finds deepsatisfaction in toiling side-by-side with the peasants.  Levin'sbook, which advances his (and Tolstoy's) belief that peasantsmust be able to own land, represents a synthesis of physical andmental labors.   4.  CITY AND COUNTRY   At the beginning of the novel, Levin is terriblyuncomfortable in the city.  At times, he seems even somewhatboorish.   Kitty, though, is from the city and enjoys life there.  Whenthey spend the winter in Moscow, Levin manages to make a lifefor himself in the city.  Under his young wife's beneficentinfluence, he shows you more social grace and polish than youwould have imagined possible.   5.  LIFE AND DEATH   Levin's greatest victory is arriving at a less panicky, moreaccepting attitude toward death.  In the early and middle partof the novel, Levin can hardly bear to look at his dyingbrother, let alone talk to him about his impending death.  WhenLevin isn't shutting the eventuality of death entirely from hismind, he dwells on it morbidly.  For a time, Levin believes thatdeath robs life of all meaning and that a God who permits deathmust be evil.   In time--after his marriage, the death of his brother, andthe birth of his son--Levin realizes that life is a cycle, andthat death has its rightful place in that cycle.   6.  ATHEISM AND FAITH   Levin's understanding that birth, life, and death form awhole enables him to be open to the possibility of belief inGod. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  COUNT ALEXEY KIRILICH VRONSKY   Vronsky is described (by Kitty's father) as "a perfectspecimen of Saint Petersburg gilded youth." He is an aristocrat,a soldier, a horseman, and a womanizer.  He has charm to burn,polish to spare, and looks that comrades envy.  In his time andplace, he is far from unusual.  As Kitty's father puts it, menlike Vronsky "are a dime a dozen."   But Vronsky's affair with Anna Karenina sets him apart fromhis peers.  Many readers feel that Vronsky is the worst villainin this story.  Others feel that he is more limited thancorrupt, more baffled than cunning, more desperate than cruel.As you read, you will have to come up with your ownassessment.   At the beginning of Anna Karenina, Vronsky leads Kitty onwith little thought for her feelings.  He also gives thestationmaster's wife 200 rubles just to impress Anna Karenina.Neither of these incidents makes you think that Vronsky is verydeep.  Perhaps the most damning event of all is thesteeplechase:  Vronsky, distracted by the praise of the crowd,makes a mistake that costs his horse her life.   On the other hand, Vronsky is not satisfied with a secretiveliaison with Anna.  He wants to marry her and have a familylife.  He gives up his dreams of being a career soldier in orderto be with Anna.  He is more mature than Anna in terms of theirrelationship.   Many readers criticize Vronsky for not insisting that Anna'sformer friends include her in their activities--after all,they're his friends, too.  It may be that his sympathies arelimited.  Society doesn't punish Vronsky the way it does Annafor living with him.  He is unable--because he doesn'texperience it himself--to appreciate Anna's pain.  It may alsobe that Vronsky needs some time to socialize by himself--Anna,by this point, is extremely hard to live with.  Yet in spite ofher jealousy, her temper, and her tears, Vronsky continues tolove Anna, is faithful to her, and does not consider leavingher.   Vronsky is devastated by Anna's suicide.  At the end, you seehim going off to fight the Turks on behalf of the Slavs.  Somereaders say that he wants to do something with his life; othersthat he is backing into an "honorable" suicide. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  PRINCE STEPAN ARKADYEVICH OBLONSKY(STIVA)   "Everything was upset in the Oblonskys' house," Tolstoywrites at the beginning of Anna Karenina--and it's all becauseof Stiva, Anna's brother.  Dolly, Stiva's wife, has learned ofyet another of his love affairs, and this time she's threateningdivorce.   Stiva is charming and sentimental.  He loves good food, goodwine, lively conversation, music, the theater, parties--andwomen.  Everyone likes Stiva, he is so much fun to have around.And no one is a better host.   However, Stiva is also deceitful, and in certain ways cruel.He never intended to be, and never is faithful to his wife, wholoves him.  He can't help himself, and besides, he's onlybehaving like most of the men he knows.  Does he rate a plus ora minus in your estimation?   The bane of Stiva's existence is money.  Years of high livinghave depleted his money, and now he's starting to use his wife'sinheritance to pay his gambling debts.   It has been said that Stiva is but a shallower version ofAnna.  He lives by his passions, but nowhere nearly as intenselyas his sister.   Good-natured Stiva is Tolstoy's portrait of decadence,hypocrisy, and self-indulgence.  Still, he radiates charm. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  PRINCESS CATHERINE ALEXANDROVNASHCHERBATSKY (KITTY)   Kitty finds her deepest happiness in being a wife and mother,a role for women that Tolstoy favored.  Absolutely clear abouther place, she brings harmony to her home and peace of mind toher husband.  She has an instinctive appreciation for the humancycle--birth, life, death--and does not fear it.  Though notwell-read, Kitty is very intelligent and extremely practical.She has abiding faith and trust in the goodness of God. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  PRINCESS DARYA ALEXANDROVNAOBLONSKAYA (DOLLY)   Dolly is Kitty's sister, Stiva's wife, and Anna'ssister-in-law.  She represents the long-suffering betrayed wifeand devoted mother.  In many ways, Dolly is heroic.  She makesdo with little money, she raises good children, she is, ingeneral, clear--though unhappy--about her lot in life.  Herhusband's infidelities have robbed her of dignity, financial andemotional security, and a sense of herself as an attractivewoman.  Yet she carries on with almost no bitterness.  In spiteof Stiva's failings, she loves and is true to him.  You mightsay that Dolly is a fool, but given the society she lives in,she makes the best of her options (which are, anyway, veryfew).   Dolly is also compassionate and a true friend.  Althougheveryone else avoids Anna, she visits her and remains herfriend.   Dolly devotes herself to those she loves, which makes her atype of heroine according to Tolstoy.  Many readers feel shegets a raw deal in the novel. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  ALEXEY ALEXANDROVICH KARENIN   Karenin is obsessed with appearances, with doing what is"correct," with order.  He is very rational, and has hardly anyimagination.  He's ponderous rather than passionate and isfrightened of strong emotions.  By the end, Karenin ispathetic.   He and Anna have a proper marriage.  Their ways are regularand their household is prosperous, but the sexual charge betweenthem is essentially dead.  This is fine with Karenin--he doesn'tgo in for romance.  In fact, he married Anna, at the insistenceof Anna's aunt, after he had flirted with Anna at a ball.  Heloves Anna, less because of the woman she is--he remainsindifferent to that aspect of conjugal intimacy--than becauseshe is simply his wife.  Once married, Karenin plays the role ofhusband completely.  Unlike Stiva, he is faithful; Karenin obeysevery letter of the law.   When Karenin learns of Anna's affair with Vronsky, the onlydemand he makes is that their life go on as usual, so that noone might find out that anything is wrong in their home life.He is concerned more with superficial honor than with his own orhis wife's happiness.   At what he believes is Anna's deathbed, Karenin undergoes asort of religious awakening.  He vows to forgive her andVronsky, to give her anything she wants, so long as it bringspeace.  But he's unable to fulfill the Christian ideal offorgiveness--she's too egotistical.  He tells himself he keepscustody of his and Anna's son out of consideration for the boy.Can you suggest another reason?   Karenin is as easily manipulated as he is manipulative.  Youknow that he was maneuvered into his marriage.  And virtuallyall his actions are dictated by the conventions of society.  Atthe end, having failed in his efforts to be a true Christian, heis easy prey for Lydia Ivanovna, a mystic who uses her"religion" as a way of keeping Karenin close to herself and anenemy to Anna.   You might contrast Levin's religious awakening withKarenin's.  After his, Levin resolves to be more humane;Karenin, however, is confirmed in his plans for vengeance. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  SETTING   The setting of Anna Karenina shifts back and forth betweenthe city and the countryside.  Tolstoy believed that the landwas Russia's most precious asset and that country life was thetruly Russian way of life.  His use of setting in the novel isclosely tied to this theme.   In the city, Tolstoy shows you a shallow, hypocriticaldrawing-room society made up mostly of idle aristocrats,bureaucrats, and "professional social gadflies." Episodes thatcontain the seeds of disaster, scenes of cruelty, and examplesof self-delusion and deceit take place in the city.  Anna givesin to Vronsky's charms in the city, where the two also firstmake love; Karenin's fake fulfillment of the Christian ideal offorgiveness happens at Anna's bedside in Saint Petersburg;Anna's former friends ostracize her at the Saint Petersburgopera house.   All the characters are affected negatively by city life.Anna and Vronsky fight more in the city than in the country.Kitty and Levin, too, are happier in the country than in thecity.  Levin, usually so careful and thrifty, finds that heoverspends during the winter, when he and his family live in thecity.   Scenes of quite different character occur in the country,where Levin, for example, creates a meaningful, enlightened lifewith his family and farm workers.  In the country, Levin has atrue spiritual illumination.   Tolstoy expresses his hope for the future of Russia inLevin's new farming system and relationship with peasants.  ButTolstoy was afraid that urban priorities would destroy countrylife and, in his view, Russia.  In describing Stiva's sale ofhis forest, Tolstoy depicts the ignorance that city people haveof the value of land.  Tolstoy gives form to another of hisfears in writing of Stiva's management of a partnership betweenbanks and the railroads to develop train transportation allthrough Russia.  This plan would necessitate the destruction ofgreat tracts of fertile farm land.   In Anna Karenina, the train station is synonymous withdisaster.  Anna and Vronsky first meet at a train station.  Annahas a recurring nightmare set in a train station, and shecommits suicide by throwing herself under a train.  Our lastencounter with Vronsky is at a train station:  he is departingfor the Slavonic war in Turkey, a cause Tolstoy opposed. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  THEMES   "I will write a novel about a woman who commits adultery,"Tolstoy reportedly said to his wife as he began Anna Karenina.But his concerns were broader than that, and in telling Anna'sstory, he touches on a number of important themes.   1.  MARRIAGE   Many readers think Anna Karenina is the greatest novel aboutmarriage ever written.  Tolstoy draws portraits of threemarriages:  Dolly and Stiva's, Anna and Karenin's, Kitty andLevin's, as well as Anna and Vronsky's domestic relationship.All but Kitty and Levin are unhappy.   Stiva regards marriage as a social convention, something onehas to submit to.  He would like Dolly to make as few emotionaldemands upon him as possible; her job is to run the household,supervise the education of the children, and make as much moneyas possible available to him for his personal pleasure.   Outwardly, Anna and Karenin appear to have a happy home.  Butappearances are deceiving; they have no romance or sexualexcitement between them.  For Anna, their life is suffocatinglypredictable.   Anna and Vronsky's relationship fails for the oppositereason:  theirs is little more than a romantic entanglement inwhich sex (for Anna, at any rate) is more important thananything else.   The marriage of Kitty and Levin is typical of what Tolstoyconsidered ideal.  It is a voluntary, rather than arranged,match between a man who is happy in his work and spiritually atpeace and a woman who feels that her purpose in life is todevote herself to her family.   2.  WOMAN'S ROLE   Some readers believe that Anna suffers because she betraysthe functions of her sex.  Her life disintegrates because byrefusing to fulfill her "proper" role in life, she clashes notonly with her husband, but also with her society and the man shetruly loves.  Out of sync with the scheme of things, she'sunable to restrain her self-destructive impulses.   But there's another way to consider Anna's failure as awoman.  She refuses to have more children with Vronsky becauseshe fears that pregnancy, nursing, and the otherresponsibilities of motherhood will lessen her sexualattractiveness.  For Vronsky, she wants to be constantlybeguiling and romantic--in short, an object of perennialdelight.   In Tolstoy's terms, this desire of Anna's denotes failurebecause it places her outside the grand cycle ofbirth-life-death.  In twentieth--century feminist terms, Annafails on this score because she strives to be an object ratherthan a person.   3.  RELIGION   Tolstoy treats the theme of religion in much the same waythat he handles the theme of marriage--by using severalcharacters to embody particular viewpoints and experiences.   Kitty has an unquestioning faith in God and His goodness.Death holds no horror for Kitty, since she believes that deathhas not only a rightful place in the natural order, but ahigher, spiritual purpose as well.   Karenin tries hard to be a good Christian.  After learning ofAnna's love affair with Vronsky, he strives to turn the othercheek.  But he cannot.  What he really wants is to be"virtuous," in order to satisfy his ego rather than his soul.   Until the very end of the novel, Levin battles with his lackof faith.  His first struggles are with the fact ofdeath--which, he holds, doesn't allow for the possibility of theexistence of God.  It is through Kitty, who knows how to carefor his dying brother, that Levin perceives that death may bepart of a benign, though mysterious, cycle.   Part VIII, Chapter 12 is when Levin has his final spiritualillumination.  After a talk with a peasant, Levin realizes thatwe must live for "what is good," Goodness--because it is outsidecause and effect--is what Levin construes as God.   4.  VENGEANCE   "Vengeance is mine; I will repay" is one of the most puzzlingepigraphs in world literature.  Biblical in origin (from St.Paul's letter to the Romans), the sentence in its entiretyreads, "'Vengeance is mine; I will repay,' saith the Lord."   Karenin takes vengeance on Anna, Anna's former friends takevengeance on her, and Anna takes vengeance on Vronsky.   But Tolstoy said he was concerned primarily with thevengeance of God.  He believes that God punishes those who liveonly for themselves.  And so Anna and Vronsky's passion for oneanother becomes their torment and their doom.   5.  RUSSIA   Anna Karenina is also a panoramic novel of Russia.  Tolstoyaddresses himself to what he considered to be the crucial issuesin his nation.   A.  City vs.  Country   Tolstoy is convinced that city "society" will ruin Russia.He feels the backbone of Russia is the rural areas andpeasantry.  Stiva, therefore, as the personification of urbanvalues is one of the villains in the novel.  Levin, theenlightened landowner, is the hero.   B.  The Emancipation of the Serfs   Tolstoy favored the 1861 Emancipation.  Before that, Russianpeasants were essentially slaves, bound to their landowners, notall of whom, needless to say, treated them with the concern thatLevin (and Tolstoy) showed their serfs.  When the Czar decreedthe serfs free in 1861, the peasants were permitted to own land,to accumulate capital, to employ others, and to form localgoverning bodies.   C.  Industrialization   The 19th century was a time of rapid industrialization inEurope.  Tolstoy (and Levin) concluded--after a tour ofEurope--that Russia was not meant to be industrialized, that the"gold-mine" of Russia is in the land, in farming.   Tolstoy held that Europe and Russia were vastly different,not only in terms of their resources, but in temperament, soul,and destiny, as well.   D.  The Slavic Question   In 1875 (while Tolstoy was finishing the novel), the Slavsliving in the Ottoman Empire revolted against the discriminationthey had long suffered.  Many Russians favored supporting theSlavs and fought against the Turks.  Stiva and Vronsky supportthe campaign; Levin does not.  Where do you think Tolstoy stoodon this question?   6.  HARMONY   In Anna Karenina, the only happy characters are those whostrike a balance between the various demands made upon them, whomanage to resolve conflicts between themselves and those to whomthey are close, and between competing ambitions.   Think of Levin, Anna, and Stiva.  Which character achievesbalance in his life?   7.  ANNA AND LEVIN   The title of the novel bears the name of the heroine, but thestory belongs equally to the hero.   Tolstoy compares and contrasts Anna and Levin.  Trace thedevelopment of these two characters.  Think about the ways theyare affected by the society in which they live, their goals, andthe obstacles they try to overcome. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  STYLE   Henry James (whose novels are models of structural clarityand symmetry) once referred to Tolstoy's War and Peace as a"loose and baggy monster." He might have said the same aboutAnna Karenina, which, like War and Peace, is an epic, a sweepingstory on a grand scale.  On the other hand, Anna Karenina ismore compact than War and Peace, and might be said to be apsychological rather than a historical epic.  It's easy toimagine Tolstoy thinking of his novels much the way he thoughtof Russia--as territories so vast their boundaries are out ofsight.   Tolstoy's epics are extremely realistic.  They are filledwith precise physical details intended to convey to you an idea,a mood, a feeling.  Every time Karenin cracks his knuckles, forexample, you know he is nervous.  When Anna screws up her eyes,you know she is straining to see, trying to understand what ishappening either in front of or inside her.  Kitty's "truthfuleyes" are a window to her undeceiving nature.  And Stiva'sfrequent playing with his whiskers is an indication of hisvanity and self-centeredness.   Tolstoy's set pieces--minutely rendered, theatrically stagedsequences--by themselves would have guaranteed him a permanentplace in literature.  Not only does he give you an indeliblepicture of a specific incident but he intertwines theadvancement of plot, the development of character, and theelaboration of major themes.  Notable set pieces in AnnaKarenina include Kitty and Levin's wedding, the steeplechase,the harvest, and the hunt.   Symbolism and foreshadowing are also important techniques;Tolstoy often uses them together.  A symbol is something thatstands for something else.  Tolstoy often uses a stormy sky tosymbolize--or represent--the turmoil in Levin's soul.  One eventis said to foreshadow another if it gives a hint of what is tohappen later.  For example, Vronsky's killing his horse in thesteeplechase foreshadows his responsibility in Anna's deathlater on.  It also symbolizes Vronsky's careless egotism.  Thetrain station is a symbol of disaster.  Anna's recurring dreamset in a train station foretells--or foreshadows--that she willdie in such a place.   Tolstoy did not go in for fancy language.  What he wanted,above all, was to communicate directly to his readers, and hedoes so through fine observations presented in vivid, preciselanguage.   The translation considered the closest to Tolstoy's style isthat of Aylmer Maude (1918; revised 1938).  In 1901, ConstanceGarnett, the renowned translator of Dostoevsky and other Russianwriters, did an English version of Anna Karenina.  Garnett'stranslation is a more old--fashioned reading than Maude's.Compare the following passages from Part VII, Chapter 23:   In order to carry through any undertaking in family life,there must necessarily be either complete division between thehusband and wife, or loving agreement.  When the relations of acouple are vacillating and neither one thing nor the other, nosort of enterprise can be undertaken.   (Garnett)   Before any definite step can be taken in a household, theremust be either complete division or loving accord betweenhusband and wife.  When their relations are indefinite it isimpossible for them to make any move.   (Maude)   Another comparison, from Part I, Chapter 22, will showfurther the difference between the two translations:   It was one of Kitty's happy days.  Her dress did not feeltight anywhere, the lace around her bodice did not slip, thebows did not crumple or come off, the pink shoes with their highcurved heels did not pinch but seemed to make her feet lighter.The thick rolls of fair hair kept up as if they had grownnaturally on the little head.  All three buttons on each of herlong gloves, which fitted without changing the shape of herhand, fastened without coming off.  The black velvet ribbon ofher locket clasped her neck with unusual softness.  The ribbonwas charming, and when Kitty had looked at her neck in the glassat home, she felt that that ribbon was eloquent.   (Maude)   It was one of Kitty's best days.  Her dress was notuncomfortable anywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere;her rosettes were not crushed nor torn off, her pink slipperswith high, hollowed-out heels did not pinch, but gladdened herfeet; and the thick rolls of fair chignon kept up on her head asif they were her own hair.  All the three buttons buttoned upwithout tearing on the long glove that covered her hand withoutconcealing its lines.  The black velvet of her locket nestledwith special softness round her neck.  That velvet wasdelicious; at home, looking at her neck in the looking-glass,Kitty had felt that the velvet was speaking.   (Garnett)   Again, Garnett's version is a bit dated--we don't refer to"berthes" any longer, nor do we say that shoes "gladden" ourfeet.  But note an interesting difference, less to do withlanguage than with perception.  Garnett, a woman, imagines morefully the feel of the velvet locket on her neck; she sees it asspeaking to the wearer.  According to Maude, a man, the locketspeaks to Kitty's admirers.   Look through both translations.  Maude's is said to comecloser to Tolstoy's vigor.  Yet, keep in mind that Garnett wasone of the earliest major English language translators ofRussian literature.  All translations done after hers owe hersome debt. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  POINT OF VIEW   Tolstoy uses an omniscient, or all-knowing, narrator.  Thismeans that the governing point of view in Anna Karenina isTolstoy's.  Tolstoy was always forthright about the fact that hewas a moralist.  He does not just depict the world in hisnovels, he passes judgment on it as well.   Tolstoy expresses his own viewpoint, and manipulates ours,through his characters.  His hero, Levin, is essentially amouthpiece for him.  Anna, although she has many traits thatTolstoy admired, went against Tolstoy's moral code, and so hehad to destroy her.  Karenin, who represents a type of personTolstoy detested, is the obvious villain in the story.   Through the device of the interior monologue, Tolstoydescribes in detail the thoughts of some of his characters.  Forexample, Anna's carriage ride to the train station where shecommits suicide is told through Anna's eyes, and the ball atwhich she steals Vronsky's heart is told through Kitty's eyes.By occasionally shifting points of view, Tolstoy heightens thedrama of the story. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  FORM AND STRUCTURE   The structure of Anna Karenina is based on the majorcharacters and what happens to them.  The two principal storiesin the book are Anna's and Levin's.  A third plot element is thedomestic and financial saga of the Oblonskys.  Kitty's time atthe German spa--during which she comes to terms with her truefeelings for Levin--also gets lengthy treatment.  Tolstoy shiftsback and forth between these stories, telling eachchronologically.   The novel is divided into Books I and II; each Book isdivided into four Parts.  (Book I contains Parts I-IV; Book II,Parts V-VIII.) The turning points for Anna and Levin--Anna'sleaving Karenin to live with Vronsky and Levin's becomingengaged to Kitty--take place at the close of Book I.   The last section of the novel--Book II, Part VIII--deals withthe Russian involvement in the war between the Turks and Slavs.Tolstoy's intention in this part was to reunite his characters'stories with the story of Russia.  The Turkish War was going onin 1875-76, when Tolstoy was completing the novel.  Tolstoywrote this chapter to underscore the relevance of Anna Kareninaand to present his readers with urgent questions regarding theirday-to-day lives. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK I, PART I   Anna Karenina gets off to a fast start, opening with afull-scale domestic crisis:  Dolly has learned that Stiva ishaving an affair with their French governess, and is threateningdivorce.  Anna Karenina, Stiva's sister, comes for a visit andconvinces Dolly to make up with Stiva.  Konstantin Levin, an oldfriend of Stiva's, arrives in Moscow to propose marriage toKitty Shcherbatsky, Dolly's younger sister.  Kitty, a youngwoman who has just made her debut in society, refuses Levin, asshe believes she's in love with the dashing Count Vronsky.   Upon meeting Anna, Kitty is impressed with her glamour,charm, and apparent kindness.  But Anna steals Vronsky'sheart.   By the end of Part I, Stiva and Dolly have achieved a shakybalance in their troubled family life:  Levin is heartbrokenover Kitty, Kitty is heartbroken over Vronsky, and Anna is tornbetween her passion for the young count and her obligations toher husband and son.  If by then you feel a little breathless,don't worry; you will have covered a lot of ground.   NOTE:  The epigraph--"Vengeance is Mine, I will repay"--isfrom the Bible, specifically from Romans 12:19.  In a letter toVikenti Vikentevich Veresaev, writer, physician, and friend ofTolstoy, Tolstoy wrote:  "I chose that epigraph in order toexplain the idea that the bad things man does have as theirconsequence all the bitter things, which come not from people,but from God, and that is what Anna Karenina herselfexperienced."   Keep this in mind as you read the novel, especially towardthe end. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-VI   The first line of Anna Karenina is one of the most celebratedin world literature:  "All happy families resemble one another,but each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way." Not onlydoes the line lead you directly to the crisis at hand (Dolly andStiva's), but it sets up the premise that Tolstoy will use indeveloping his story.  The essence of the novel is the centralcharacters in their respective relationships--Stiva and Dolly,Anna and Karenin, Anna and Vronsky.   You learn a lot about Stiva in these first chapters.  Despitethe havoc he has wreaked on his household, he wakes up at hisusual time after a pleasant dream about the high life--wine,women and song.  It isn't until he realizes that his dressinggown is not in its usual place that he remembers he hasn't sleptwith his wife, but was banished to a couch in his study.  Stivadoesn't regret his affair (there have been many of those); heregrets having got caught.   NOTE:  Tolstoy presents Stiva's morning routine in greatdetail.  Tolstoy, a major realist writer, gives you a wealth ofseemingly insignificant tidbits about his characters' habits,tendencies, and mannerisms.   At times you may feel bogged down with information, but bearin mind that the details add up to give you a concrete pictureof the world inside the novel.  Tolstoy's exactitude makes thestory that much more searing because you get an almostphotographic image of the characters, which makes it easy toidentify with them.   How closely Tolstoy must have watched those around him!   Let's tally the details that Tolstoy gives us about Stiva'smorning habits and see what they add up to.  Stiva plungeshimself into his activities in order to forget his troubles.This tells you he's not a particularly reflective person whotries hard to avoid feeling guilty even when he's in the wrong.He reads a Liberal newspaper.  Unlike the Conservatives, whoemphasize the importance of organized religion and close familylife, the Liberals hold that religion distracts one from the funto be had in this life (as opposed to the afterlife) and thatmarriage is an outmoded institution.  Tolstoy was aConservative; by telling you that Stiva reads a Liberalnewspaper--a seemingly small detail--Tolstoy is letting you knowthat Stiva figures as a villain in the novel.   A widow drops by to ask Stiva's help with a petition she'ssubmitting to a government agency.  This should alert you to thefact that Stiva is in a position of power.  Though he doesn'tcare about the widow and her problem, Stiva helps her because helikes appearing powerful and wants others to think well of him.You also get the impression that in Tolstoy's Russia connectionsare vital if you need a government agency to act on your behalf.Through careful placement of telling details, Tolstoy has givenyou not only a vivid portrait of Stiva, but a good look at hissociety as well.   Tolstoy digresses to give you a bit of Stiva's history.Though Stiva had not done well at school (he was lazy andmischievous) he nonetheless has a distinguished governmentcareer.  This is partly because he had good connections, andpartly because he is so little interested in his work that hekeeps a valuable objectivity on office matters.   NOTE:  Tolstoy is making a comment here on governmentagencies and bureaucracy in general, and city life inparticular.  To Tolstoy, Stiva represents the worst of bothenvironments:  He hasn't really earned what he has, and hisprogress is due more to lack of interest than to devotion.   How do you think Stiva would fare in today's governmentbureaucracy or corporate world?   It nearly slips his mind, but on his way out of the houseStiva does remember to apologize to Dolly.  Dolly breaks down,infuriated and humiliated by Stiva's pity.  She wants--andrealizes she will never have--his love.   NOTE:  THE "FRENCH MARRIAGE" The type of marriage that Dollyand Stiva have was not unusual in Tolstoy's time.  Manymarriages were arranged in order to enhance both families'financial and social position.  Romance was not considered amajor ingredient in these marriages, and husbands and wivesfrequently had lovers on the side.  In fact, it was not uncommonfor a man to provide his mistress with an apartment, wardrobe,spending money, and so forth.  This type of marriage issometimes called a "French marriage," as arranged marriages werethe rule in court society of 18th--and 19th-century France.  TheRussian nobility often modeled their conduct and socialpractices after the French.  You might want to read the novelsof Honore de Balzac, particularly La Cousine Bette (1846), for adetailed treatment of the "French marriage."   Although spouses were not expected to be true to one another,they were expected to be discreet in carrying on theirextramarital affairs.  Later in the novel Anna gets into troublebecause she flaunts her affair with Vronsky, refusing to play byrules she considers hypocritical.   What do you think of the concept of a "French marriage?"Think about the ways this sort of marriage affects both sexes.Pay special attention to the difference in men's and women'sroles as exemplified by the Oblonsky marriage.  And think aboutthe pain that is caused if one partner does not want a "Frenchmarriage." This will figure prominently as the story unfolds.   Levin arrives to see Stiva.  This is your first encounterwith the hero of the novel.  Notice the contrast between Stivaand Levin.  Stiva is the epitome of urbane charm; Levin seems abit bumbling in comparison.  Tolstoy, who distrusted cityslickers, introduces here his theme on the values of countrylife vs.  city life.  Contrast Levin's seriousness aboutmarriage with Stiva's attitude:  this, too, lets you know thatTolstoy favors Levin.   NOTE:  As he thinks about Kitty, Levin recalls that theShcherbatsky family always had a French governess (as do theOblonskys) and that Kitty and her sisters were required to speakFrench fluently.  This was not unusual in upper-class familiesin Tolstoy's time.  A thorough knowledge of French was a statussymbol.   Tolstoy, though he spoke French, resented this snobbery.  Hewas Russian through and through, and was proud of it.  You'llsee that he sometimes inserts French words into his characters'dialogue.  He does this so their speech will be realistic. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS VII-XI   Tolstoy introduces two important themes:  the insufficiencyof a purely intellectual approach to life, and Russian politics.As he often does, Tolstoy has two characters--in this case,Levin and Sergius--argue the issues raised by his themes.   While in Moscow, Levin stays with his half-brother, SergiusIvanich Koznyshev (Sergey), a well-known intellectual andwriter.  The two men rarely talk of personal matters; when theymeet they invariably argue over politics and philosophy.  Thistime it's no different.  Levin tells Sergey that he's no longera member of the zemstvo (local council).  Sergey criticizesLevin for having quit.   NOTE:  THE ZEMSTVOS In Tolstoy's time, Russia had acentralized government headed by the Czar.  The zemstvos werelocal councils made up primarily of landowners.  The zemstvostried to take care of problems such as grain storage andrelations between landowners and peasants, on a local level.  Onmatters that had to be decided at the national level, thezemstvos would make recommendations in the hope that the highergovernment agencies would accept their suggestions.   The zemstvos were relatively new in Tolstoy's time.  Levin(and Tolstoy) had reservations about the zemstvos becausepeasants were not nearly as well represented as wealthylandowners and because they feared that the landowners would tryto use the zemstvos to take advantage of the peasants, who hadvirtually no education or prior political experience.   You learn that Levin's brother Nicholas has been seriouslyill with tuberculosis (often called consumption in the novel).Levin gets so depressed when he thinks of Nicholas that he triesto put him out of his thoughts for the time being.  At thispoint Levin can't deal with the idea of death.  Coming to termswith death in general and Nicholas' death in particular will beone of Levin's major struggles in the novel.  The first order ofbusiness, he feels, is to propose to Kitty.   Levin goes to the skating rink to meet Kitty, who is therewith her family.  He shows off, trying to impress her with hisskating finesse.  Kitty feels anew her fondness for Levin, butbelieves she's in love with Vronsky, a society man.  Kitty'smother favors Vronsky as a match for Kitty, and though PrincessShcherbatsky invites Levin to their home, she does so rathercoldly.  Poor Levin's more nervous than ever.   Levin and Stiva dine at a restaurant of Stiva's choosing--theAngleterre (French for "England")--to which Stiva is in debt.This is the first mention of Stiva's increasingly seriousfinancial problems.   Again Tolstoy makes a point of contrasting the two men.Stiva is a picture of elegance and polish and is relaxed in poshsurroundings.  Levin feels like a bull in a china shop.  But healso feels somewhat scornful of finery for the sake of fineryand anything that seems to him to have a shallow emphasis onappearance.   Take note that Stiva refuses to speak French with the waiter.As you know, knowledge of French was a sign of being upperclass; Stiva refuses to grant the waiter this bit of socialstatus.  Would you have expected Stiva to be such a snob?   Levin and Stiva talk about women.  Levin admits that he feelsguilty over having "sowed his wild oats" as a youth and fearsthat he is now unworthy of Kitty.  He wants not only Kitty'slove, but her forgiveness, too.   NOTE:  Levin is struggling with a matter that preoccupiedTolstoy.  Tolstoy, too, sought sanctity in marriage--afterhaving played around a lot as a young man--and had anextramarital affair (just before writing Anna Karenina) of whichhe was greatly ashamed.  Levin represents one side of Tolstoy'sinner conflict, Anna the other.   Stiva describes Vronsky in glowing terms:  he's a first-ratefellow, a good horseman, clever, slated for success.  (Take noteof the qualities Stiva admires.  They do not square withTolstoy's criteria.) Nonetheless, Stiva is on Levin's side, andadvises him to propose to Kitty the next day, in the classicmanner. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XII-XV   Tolstoy begins this section by emphasizing Kitty's youth andher surprising success in her first season in society.  She'dhad not only two serious suitors (Levin and Vronsky) but flocksof admirers as well.   Levin's arrival on the scene and his obviously seriousintentions spark some arguments between Kitty's parents.  PrinceShcherbatsky favors Levin, finding him solid, forthright, andsincere in his love.  The princess favors Vronsky--handsome,dashing, polished.  She finds Levin awkward, overly critical ofcity life, too countrified.   Tolstoy uses the quarrel between the Shcherbatskys tohighlight a dilemma of the time.  In accordance with tradition,the marriage between the prince and princess had been arrangedby relatives.  But times have changed.  The princess honestlydoesn't know how marriages come about now.  The French--and oldRussian--way of deciding marriages for young people was out offavor.  The English way--letting young people decide entirelyfor themselves--frightens the princess; anyway, it too isfrowned upon in Russian society.  The princess realizes that ithas to be a mixture of free choice and guidance and is leftfeeling uncertain about what her role as Kitty's mother shouldbe.   Weighing on both the prince and the princess is Dolly'ssituation.  Oblonsky, too, had been an "ideal match," but he'smaking Dolly miserable.  The prince fears that Vronsky may becut from the same cloth as Oblonsky.   The next day when Levin proposes, Kitty tells him it's"impossible." She's unable to tell Levin what her feelings are,for she doesn't know.  Upon hearing his proposal, she was"filled with rapture." But it lasted for only a moment.  Thenthoughts of Vronsky crowded their way into her mind.   Levin tries to leave the Shcherbatsky's home, but isprevented from doing so by the entrance of Kitty's mother.Every minute of the evening is torture for Levin.  One ofKitty's friends, Countess Nordston, dislikes Levin and makes apoint of picking on him.  When Vronsky arrives, Levin feels justabout finished off; he doesn't wonder that Kitty prefers thehandsome, socially graceful young officer.   NOTE:  Tolstoy makes the point--through the prince--thatwomen are incapable of recognizing serious intentions in asuitor.  The prince says that a marriage between Kitty andVronsky would spell trouble.   Do you agree that men are more perceptive in this regard?Doesn't this seem a bit at odds with Tolstoy's feeling thatwomen are essentially domestic, in tune with things pertainingto hearth and home?   Tolstoy makes another point in this section.  First heestablishes that Countess Nordston is shallow and nasty; then hehas her criticize life in the country for being dull.  This isone of Tolstoy's favorite devices:  he picks a character whom hedislikes and has that person express opinions counter to hisown. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XVI-XXII   Tolstoy gives you a chance to become acquainted with Vronskyin Chapter XVI through a mixture of biographical detail andinterior monologue.  You learn that Vronsky had no family lifeas a child, that his mother was a famous socialite and femmefatale.  Vronsky still has a troubled relationship with hismother:  He doesn't respect her loose way of life and he resentsthat she meddles in his life.  Though Vronsky's mother is aminor character in the novel, her relations with Vronsky willhave an important effect on the plot.   You also learn that Vronsky doesn't realize he is triflingwith Kitty in a way that could seriously hurt her feelings ordamage her reputation.  He's young and self-centered, and is toobusy enjoying himself to worry about anything.  Yet, he'sbeginning to grow tired of the sort of night life that soenchants Stiva.   Keep these thoughts in mind as the novel progresses andVronsky's situation becomes more and more complex.  His views ondomesticity will change in ways that might surprise you.   You meet Anna for the first time in Chapter XVIII.  In thefirst chapter Tolstoy let you know that the prospect of Anna'svisit gladdened Stiva because he knew her presence would changethings.  Indeed it does--every character in the novel isaffected.   Vronsky is the first major character to see Anna.  He goes tothe train station to meet his mother, who introduces him to hercompartment mate, Anna Karenina.  At this point Vronsky's motherlikes Anna but this will change.  Vronsky is immediately smittenwith Anna.  He notices immediately an "excess of vitality" that"betrays itself against her will." Anna's inner light shone,"despite of herself in her faint smile." Tolstoy has carefullyprepared the entrance of his heroine.  You're in suspensebecause Dolly and Stiva's situation is unresolved; like Stiva,you're expecting Anna to fix things up between them.  Perhapsyou've been expecting Anna to be practical, perceptive--theperfect go-between.  Now that you've met her, you're aware thatshe's a somewhat mysterious woman of captivating beauty.  Areyou wondering why she has come to Moscow?  It seems she'sarriving on short notice; perhaps she's impulsive, perhaps she'srunning away from something.  There's more here than meets theeye--think about it as you watch Anna operate over the course ofthe novel.   Just as you're getting caught up in the bustling atmosphereof the train station and being swept along by Vronsky's suddenpassion for Anna, Tolstoy pulls the rug out from under you.There is an accident--the stationmaster has either fallen orthrown himself beneath a train.  To impress Anna, Vronsky givesthe stationmaster's widow two hundred rubles.  To Anna, theaccident--and Vronsky's gesture--is a bad omen.   NOTE:  FORESHADOWING Pay attention to the physicaldescription of Anna in this chapter.  Her "excess of vitality"will prove to be integral to her demise.   The stationmaster's death functions in two ways.  It hasimmediate dramatic impact because it is unexpected, like a boltfrom the blue.  The accident immediately casts a pall on Annaand Vronsky's meeting; from the beginning the two have aconnection in death.  This incident will resonate through therest of the novel.  The stationmaster's death foreshadows Anna'sdeath later on.  The old man--or someone very much likehim--will haunt Anna in a recurring nightmare that sheinterprets as foretelling her death.   Two interesting character quirks are described:  Vronskyseems less than sincere in giving the widow money.  (Be on thelookout for other such indications of egotism in Vronsky.) AndStiva tells Anna the family is hoping that Vronsky will marryKitty.  Remember that earlier Stiva had encouraged Levin.  Afteryou've gotten to know Stiva better think back to this chapterand try to answer the following questions:  Was Stiva lying toLevin?  Is he lying now?  Or does he always back the most likelywinner?   Stiva takes Anna to his and Dolly's home.  On the way hetells her his troubles.  It's understood that she'll help him.   Dolly receives Anna in her bedroom, where she is surroundedby her children.  Anna's nieces and nephews are drawn to her andshe to them.  Keep this in mind as the novel progresses:  Anna'srelationship with children is a sort of weathervane of hermental state.   Anna convinces Dolly to forgive Stiva.  Here, Anna is a modelof canniness and acuity.  She guesses accurately what will mosttouch Dolly and lays it on thick.  She waxes eloquent aboutStiva's feelings of shame and humiliation (Do you remember anysuch thing?), and emphasizes that Stiva loves Dolly more thananything in the world.  Anna tells Dolly that when Stiva firstfell in love with her, he associated her with poetry and highideals (this may or may not be true).  To finish it off, Annasays that if she were in Dolly's place she would forgive andforget Stiva's offense.   Notice how brilliantly manipulative Anna can be.  Do youadmire that trait?  Does it make you uneasy?   While Dolly and Stiva make up with one another, Anna visitsKitty.  Kitty is impressed with Anna, immediately feels close toher and confides in her.  Tolstoy created Anna and Kitty asopposites; contrast them as you learn more about each one.   Kitty tells Anna about an upcoming ball and her hopes for aromance with Vronsky.  Kitty--innocently or naively--would likeAnna to be there to share in her happiness.  She says sheimagines Anna "in lilac."   Anna wears black to the ball, a color that points up hersophistication and sensuality.  Vronsky all but ignores Kittyand can't take his eyes off Anna.  Kitty can see that Anna isexhilarated by her own attractiveness and the effect it has onVronsky.  Kitty decides that there is "something strange,satanic, and enchanting" about Anna.  What do you think of thisobservation?  Should Anna, as an older woman, be mindful of thepain she's causing Kitty?   NOTE:  Although Anna is trying to keep Vronsky at arm'slength, Tolstoy's descriptions give her away.  Her hair isdisarranged, her eyes are sparkling, her voluptuous arms areadorned with bracelets.  Tolstoy tells you there is something"terrible and cruel in her charm." What he means is that thereis something very sexual in her charm.  Tolstoy was ill at easewith blatant sexuality, especially in women.  Pay attention tosuch descriptions--they usually foreshadow trouble. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXIV-XXVII   These chapters concern Levin, who's extremely depressed overKitty's rejection.   He goes to visit his brother Nicholas.  Levin feels heartsickremembering the tumult and outright violence of much ofNicholas' life, because he knows that deep down Nicholas is noworse than any other person.  But sickness and poverty havealways dogged him, and he has rarely known peace.  (Note thatTolstoy uses Levin's interior monologue to tell you aboutNicholas and about the brothers' complex relationship.)   Levin finds Nicholas very ill and living with Masha, hiscommon-law wife.  Levin told Stiva he had a horror of "fallenwomen," but he's kind to Masha, and sees that she takes goodcare of Nicholas.  Levin is often harsher in his judgments thanin his actions.  He asks Nicholas and Masha to come stay withhim.   The next day Levin goes home to the country, vowing to forgethis hopes for marriage and never again to let himself be sweptaway by passion.   Levin had to leave Moscow in order to start putting his lifeback together.  Although his hopes for marriage with Kitty aredashed, he shores up other aspects of his life:  He gets hisfarm running well, and he strengthens his relations withNicholas.   The awkwardness that afflicted Levin in the city is gone whenhe's at home.  In what other ways does Levin seem changed?  Andwhat is Tolstoy telling you through these changes in Levin? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXVIII-XXXIII   These chapters deal with Anna and her husband Karenin.   Anna decides abruptly to leave Moscow and return to SaintPetersburg.  She confesses to Dolly that she ruined the ball forKitty.  When Dolly makes light of it, Anna insists that she waswrong but then defends herself by saying that it wasn't reallyher fault.  Dolly comments that Anna, in denying blame, spokethe way Stiva would have.  What does this tell you?  You alreadyknow that Stiva lies regularly.   Anna herself knows she's lying.  She knows she's running awayfrom Vronsky and her attraction to him.  On the train home,she's nearly delirious with shame.  At a station stop, she getsout for a breath of air.  There is a man hammering at the sideof the tracks--this hammering will be part of the recurringnightmare that foretells her death.  Again Vronsky is part ofthe scene--he is following her to Moscow against her wishes.   When Anna sees her husband at the Saint Petersburg station,her first thought is that his ears stick out in an absurd way.At this point, Anna is not consciously blaming Karenin for herunhappiness.  She blames herself for not appreciating herhusband's devotion.  Try to isolate the turning points in Anna'srealization that she must leave Karenin.  Nothing yet has reallyhappened between Anna and Vronsky, yet Tolstoy has managed toinject a lot of excitement into each of their brief meetings.One of the ways he does this is by casting an atmosphere ofimpending doom for Anna and the count.  Another is his use ofsurprise:  earlier, neither you nor Vronsky were expecting tosee Anna just then; in this chapter, neither Anna nor you wereexpecting to see Vronsky.  Tolstoy also communicates that Annaand Vronsky are obsessed with one another; obsessions generallylead to tragic ends.  What else has you on the edge of yourseat?   Anna has the same sinking feeling upon seeing her sonSeriozha.  He's not as nice as she remembered him.  This isimportant.  It not only tells you that her life pales incomparison to the excitement she felt with Vronsky, but it's thefirst loosening of her ties with her family.   Yet get a glimpse of Karenin's habits.  He's extremely busy,and although his wife has been away, he makes no specialarrangements to spend time with her.  Tolstoy takes pains totell that there's not a trace of the animation about Anna thatwas evident in Moscow. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTER XXXIV   In this chapter, you see Vronsky in his habitualsurroundings.  (What a contrast to Karenin!) Vronsky seemsordinary here; like any other young man who is feeling his oats,he is full of youth and good health, and is enjoying a carefreelife.  It's interesting that Tolstoy should end this part byreturning Anna and Vronsky to their normal surroundings.  If yougo by appearances, everything is just as it always is.  What doyou think Tolstoy means to accomplish by this? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK I, PART II   The second part of Anna Karenina is gloomy.  Kitty falls illafter being rejected by Vronsky and goes to a German spa torecover.  Her ailment is more emotional than physical, and herstruggle demands soul-searching rather than medical attention.   Anna consummates her love for Vronsky, and the two begin atorrid affair.  When Anna confesses to Karenin, she is pregnantwith Vronsky's child. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-III   In these chapters you see how the members of the Shcherbatskyfamily are, each in their own way, affected, confused, andsometimes hurt by their society's courtship and marriagecustoms.   The family is in a tizzy over Kitty's illness.  They summondoctors, each more prominent than the last, to examine her, butnone can find anything physically wrong with her.  To appeaseher mother, Kitty pretends to look forward to the trip to thespa recommended by the doctors.   Dolly comes to visit, although she has troubles of her own.Stiva is rarely at home, several of her children have scarletfever, and their finances are shaky.  Kitty confides to Dollythat she knows now she really loves Levin.  So upset is Kittythat she turns her anger against Dolly, harshly criticizing herfor putting up with Stiva.  Kitty also says that she resents herparents' trying to marry her off, that when she goes to ballsshe feels like a piece of meat out for inspection.  She says shefeels comfortable only with children and goes home with Dolly totake care of her nieces and nephews.   NOTE:  SOCIAL CHANGE IN RUSSIA At the time Anna Karenina isset, Russian society was on the brink of change.  Marriagecustoms are often a good weathervane for a society--when thesecustoms are in flux, usually other changes are in the wind.  Forexample, at the time of the marriage of the Prince and Princess,all matches were arranged.  This meant that young people marriedthose in their parents' social and economic set.  With youngpeople freer to make their own choices, marriages between peopleof different background became possible.   You see through the Shcherbatsky family the way in whichthese changes sometimes confused people.  The Princess doesn'tknow what her role as Kitty's mother is now that Kitty candecide for herself whom to marry.  She is torn among wanting toprotect her daughter, wanting to show respect for Kitty'sjudgment, and her attachments to the old ways of doing things.The Prince is suspicious of the newly risen class of merchants.He is old nobility and it bothers him to think that a youngperson may marry a person of a different class.   Kitty is overwhelmed by her first season in society.  Datingand balls are new to her, and so are the attentions of youngmen.  Her inexperience kept her from realizing that she lovedLevin.   If you were in Kitty's place, how would you feel about yourmother?  Given the conventions of the time, what courses ofaction would be open to you?  Remember, you have the support ofyour father in this case. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS IV-XI   These chapters plunge us into Moscow society.   Tolstoy begins by simply describing the three major socialcircles.  The highest, consisting of government officials, isthe set to which Karenin belongs.  The next is "run" by theCountess Lydia Ivanovna and is made up mostly of rather plain,elderly rich women and ambitious men of a scholarly turn ofmind.  The third circle is the one that consists of balls,dinner parties, opera excursions, and the like.  This glitteringset is "led" by the Princess Betsy Tverskaya.  All thesecircles, of course, overlap, and there are rivalries betweenthem.   Keep your eye on Princess Betsy; she's a villain.  Tolstoytakes this opportunity to make her appear silly.  She's at theopera to see a famous soprano, although, as your narrator putsit, she wouldn't know the difference between the diva's voiceand that of a chorus girl.  She doesn't even stay until the endbut goes home to powder her nose before her guests arrive.   Conversation in Princess Betsy's drawing room is shallow.  Noone seems to know what she is talking about, lots of names aredropped, gossip is exchanged, jokes are made at others' expense.Anna and Karenin are for a time the topic of discussion.  Somemake the observation that Anna is much changed since her visitto Moscow.  Everyone knows that she and Vronsky are interestedin each other.   NOTE:  Of course, everyone speaks French at Princess Betsy's.Karenin, upon entering the drawing room, says to his hostess,"Your Hotel Rambouillet is in full muster." Karenin is referringto La Marquise de Rambouillet (1588-1665), the Parisiannoblewoman who had the first literary salon.  Her gatherings ofwriters and artists had considerable influence on the culturalscene of the day and established in France the tradition ofsalons.  The last great era for literary salons in Paris was the1920s and 1930s when Pablo Picasso, Ernest Hemingway, F.  ScottFitzgerald, James Joyce, and other writers, painters, andcomposers gathered at the homes of such people as the Americanwriter Gertrude Stein.   Later in the evening, Anna and Vronsky, having arrivedseparately, are at Princess Betsy's.  Karenin notices his wifetalking with the young count and sees nothing wrong in theirconduct.  But his friends are beginning to talk, and thisbothers him.   Karenin leaves early to mull over the conversation he wouldlike to have with Anna.  But it's hard for him.  Never beforehas he tried to put himself in Anna's place, to imagine what shefeels.  He honestly believes he has been a model husband.  Hecan't fathom that Anna might love someone else.  He decides toexplain it to Anna from two points of view.  First, he willemphasize the importance of public opinion (the last thing hewants is a scandal); second, he will bring up the religiousaspects of marriage.  If need be, he decides, he will mentionthe harm that an extramarital affair would bring to their son;and he will finish by mentioning the unhappiness that such anaffair would cause Anna herself.   Karenin lays it out clearly and logically.  Knowing Anna asyou do, do you think she'll be swayed by those arguments?  Youknow Karenin is nervous and unsure, for he cracks his knuckles.What justifications can you find for Karenin's attitude?  Do youhave sympathy for Karenin at this point?   Karenin tries to talk with Anna, but his attempt doesn't gowell.  Anna pretends that nothing is wrong, but inside she isseething.  She believes her husband knows nothing about love.Since her return from Saint Petersburg, Anna's feelings towardher husband have changed.  She no longer blames herself; sheblames him for her dissatisfactions.  What do you think aboutthis?   The scene shifts to Anna's "other life." By now, Vronsky haspursued Anna for a year.  Finally, they consummate their love,But theirs is no joyful tryst--afterward Anna feels ashamed, andliterally falls at Vronsky's feet, begging forgiveness.  What astrange reaction, you may well be thinking.  Vronsky has wantedAnna ever since he saw her, and now she's apologizing to him.Have you ever felt so guilty about something you did that youfelt as though you'd wronged the entire world?  Anna feels thatway now.  For his part, Vronsky feels "like a murderer," that"the body he deprived of life was their love." He feels that"the body must be cut in pieces and hidden away, and he mustmake use of what he has obtained by the murder." Both realizethey have entered a new existence, but neither is able to thinkclearly about it yet.   Tolstoy associates sexual passion with the dark feelings thatlead to crimes.  Do you think that Anna and Vronsky have donesomething wrong? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XII-XVII   These chapters tell you a lot about Levin and his life as theowner of a large country estate.   Although several months have passed since his proposal toKitty, he is still miserable over his rejection.  But his farmtakes up most of his time and attention and he is satisfied withthis diversion.  The descriptions of the weather and countrysideare lush in these chapters, and are a good indication that Levinspends a lot of his time drinking in the beauty of hissurroundings--a far cry from life in the city!   You learn that Levin is writing a book on agriculture.  It'sa revolutionary book because it emphasizes that the laborers areas much a factor in successful farming as climate and soil.This was a topic dear to Tolstoy's heart, and he speaks on itthrough Levin.   NOTE:  EMANCIPATION OF THE SERFS Until 1861 the Russianagricultural system was composed of wealthy landowners andserfs.  Serfs were essentially slaves; not allowed to own land,they worked their master's land for a small salary.  In thattime, Russian farms were huge and landowning families dependedon their serfs not only for field work but also for varioushousekeeping tasks.  A landowner's heirs inherited his serfs aswell as his money and property.   After the Czar's emancipation decree freed them, the serfswere allowed to own land and to work for themselves.  Butbecause for so many generations they had worked for exceedinglylow wages, most serfs hadn't been able to save any money withwhich to buy land.  They continued to work for the estate ownersthey had always served.   But this situation also caused problems, for landowners couldno longer get away with paying very low wages.  Legally allowedto be ambitious, serfs were now demanding that they be betterpaid.  As a result, they and their former owners wouldnegotiate, sometimes in painful detail, the arrangement betweenthem.  For example, should serfs get a percentage of profits?How should serfs who had managed to buy a small plot of landdivide their time between their own farming and that for thelandowner?   The serfs' new freedom had psychological effects as well.Some landowners could not adjust to thinking of former serfs astheir equals.  Other landowners, who had always regarded theirserfs as part of the family, were now hurt at the suddendistance between them.   Levin's plan to make the serfs equal partners in his farminfuriated other landowners.  It also made some of the serfssuspicious.  After all, if that was the way Levin had felt allalong, why hadn't he done it sooner, they wondered.   You remember that the Oblonskys were having money problems.Their situation has worsened, and Stiva comes to stay with Levinwhile he sells a forest that Dolly owns.  He has made a dealwith Ryabinin, a dealer Levin doesn't respect.  Ryabinin comesto Levin's home to conclude his transaction with Stiva.  Levinis against the deal because Stiva's price is too low, and makesa higher counteroffer.  But Stiva has promised Ryabinin andfeels it would be dishonorable to go back on his word.   This is an important incident.  It points up that citypeople, with little knowledge of respect for the land,contribute to its devaluation.  Tolstoy believed that peoplelike Stiva would eventually ruin Russia through suchmake-money-quick business deals.   Stiva tells Levin that Kitty has been ill, that she andVronsky never got together.  He also tells Levin that theprincess had been impressed with Vronsky because he was a"perfect aristocrat." (Kitty didn't care about this.) This leadsthe two men into a discussion on the meaning of aristocracy.Levin says that he worries about the extravagance of urbannobles who consider it beneath their dignity to haggle overprices.  He points out that Ryabinin's children may well bebetter off than Stiva's.  Levin goes on to say that, unlikeStiva and the princess, he doesn't consider Vronsky a truearistocrat, because his family, though rich, does not go backvery far, and his mother's reputation is questionable.  Levinsays he considers himself a true nobleman--his family can betraced back many generations, his relatives have always beenwell educated and independent.  Never have they--unlike Stivaand Vronsky--taken government grants and awards and high-levelbureaucratic jobs given out largely on the basis of connections.The conversation remains pleasant, although Levin and Stivadisagree on all points raised.   NOTE:  Tolstoy is clearly talking through Levin.  Stiva ispart of an urban crowd that is gaining more and more governmentpower, primarily through agencies that Tolstoy thinks harmful.In this conversation, you can see that Levin and Stiva havelaunched themselves on diverging paths.  These paths symbolizewhat Tolstoy believed were conflicting possibilities for thefuture of Russia. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XVII-XXV   Two events of great importance happen in these chapters:Anna discovers and tells Vronsky that she is pregnant by him,and Vronsky loses the steeplechase, killing his horse in theprocess.  The first has direct impact on the plot, the second isimportant thematically and stylistically.   For the first time we see Vronsky in his element--withhorses.  He is very loving with his mare, and calls her"darling." He seems more intuitive with her than with people.   This is Vronsky's big day, the day of the steeplechase, whichhe is expected to win.  All he has to do is keep cool.  But he'sdistracted--his mother and brother disapprove of his affair withAnna, and his mother is threatening to cut off his allowance.And Vronsky is growing more and more dissatisfied with thesecrecy with which he and Anna must conduct their lifetogether.   NOTE:  Vronsky's mother worries that he has a "Werther-likepassion" for Anna.  Werther is the hero of The Sorrows of theYoung Werther by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832), one ofGermany's most noted writers.  Werther commits suicide becausethe woman he loves is married.   When Vronsky goes to see Anna before the race, she tells himshe is pregnant.  He immediately tells her that she must leaveKarenin and live with him.  Anna finds she has underestimatedVronsky.  She had feared he would take her pregnancy toolightly, but he appears to take it more seriously than even shedoes.  He correctly points out that she suffers from society,her son, and her husband--and that if she doesn't break cleanlywith Karenin she is dooming herself to a living hell.  But Annawill not listen.   Keep an eye on Vronsky--his growth, for a variety of reasons,outstrips Anna's as they go on together.   The race itself is a masterpiece of descriptive writing.Tolstoy shows you every detail.  He also succeeds in making thescene unbearably exciting.  The pacing here is perfect.   Distracted by his conversation with Anna, Vronsky is not intop form.  An excellent horseman, he runs a fine race.  But hismare is nervous, and although he guides her through much of thecourse with the intimacy of a lover, he makes a fatal mistake.During a jump, he relaxes in the saddle, letting his weightsettle, thus breaking her back.  This is the worst moment ofVronsky's life so far--his mistake is beyond correction, and wasentirely his fault.   The death of Frou-Frou foreshadows Vronsky's responsibilityfor Anna's death.  It points up that egotism is a powerful partof his nature--he was overconscious of the crowd during therace.  The descriptions of Anna and Frou-Frou are strikinglysimilar.  Both have fine necks and beautiful, expressive eyes;both are submissive to Vronsky's wishes--both ultimately slipfrom his control. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXVI-XXIX   Karenin seems out of place at the steeplechase.  (He alsoseems out of his place in his own home.  He and Anna talk justenough to keep up appearances.  He has turned his anger towardAnna against Seriozha and has little to do with the boy.)   Karenin is infuriated that Anna should ignore him at the racein front of a crowd of people.  When he scolds her in theircarriage on the way home, she shocks him with the news that sheloves Vronsky and is his mistress, and that she hates herhusband.   Karenin tells her he will need time to decide the best way tosafeguard his honor.  Until then, he tells Anna she must act asthough she were a proper wife.   What do you think of Karenin's response?  Do you believe heis a hypocrite, concerned only for his reputation?  He doeshurt, so much so that he has tried to turn off his emotions.   Do you think Anna really believes that she can carry on asthough her husband didn't exist? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXX-XXXV   These chapters cover Kitty at the German spa where she hasgone to recover her health.  You recall that after she turneddown Levin's marriage proposal, she became so depressed andanxious that her doctors suggested she go away.   NOTE:  It was common for wealthy 19th-century Europeans to goyearly to a spa--a country resort built near a mineral spring.The water from the spring was believed to have curative powers."Taking the waters" became an expression meaning "to go to aspa."   While at a spa, guests bathed in and drank mineral water,followed special diets and exercise programs.  Vacationing at aspa was a "rest cure" for illness, anxiety, and thehustle-bustle of daily life.   Kitty's plan for self-improvement while at the spa backfiresin a highly ironic way.  She decides to model herself after agirl named Varenka who takes care of ailing elderly people.Kitty admires Varenka's apparent selflessness.   Kitty befriends an elderly couple.  The husband becomes sofond of her that his wife comes to suspect Kitty's intentions.   Kitty thus realizes that she is not at heart a professionaldo-gooder.  She wishes to devote herself to her family andfriends, not to strangers.  She also realizes that she wants tomarry and have children--that Varenka's solitary life, devoid ofall sensual pleasure, is not for her.   Kitty's realization is her most important step towardmaturity.  She stops patterning herself after others--Varenka,for example, and her mother's vision of a socially accomplishedyoung noblewoman--and comes to terms with what she herselfwants.  Kitty is a heroine in Tolstoy's eyes.  She goes throughthe difficult process of getting to know herself; her strugglemay not be as philosophical and torturous as Levin's, but shedoes suffer, and she doesn't give up until she has achieved trueclarity.  Tolstoy also considers Kitty a heroine because shewants above all to devote herself to her husband and children.Kitty doesn't back into this choice; she fights for it.  Somereaders feel that Kitty, because she is the quintessential wifeand mother, is not a modern "liberated" woman.  But keep in mindthat Kitty has the grit to hold out for what she wants, and thatis a form of liberation.   By ending Part II with Kitty's illumination, Tolstoy sharpensthe suspense.  Surely Kitty's newly won maturity will bear onthe plot of the novel.  Tolstoy gives you a hint of what willhappen by starting Part III with Levin. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK I, PART III   In Part III, both Levin and Vronsky are frustrated by thefeeling that their lives seem suspended, that they are "spinningtheir wheels." Levin pours his energies into his estate, intoestablishing a cooperative land arrangement with the peasantswho work for him.  But he knows deep down that his life isincomplete without Kitty.  He also comes to know that he hasbeen trying to bury himself in work in order to banish from hismind thoughts of his dying brother--and death itself.   Vronsky is agitated because Anna has not left Karenin.  He isweary of their "secret life" and aches for a change. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-III   You remember that when Levin came to Moscow to propose toKitty he stayed with his half-brother Sergey.  They argued thenabout politics (specifically the zemstvos, or local councils)and other intellectual matters.  This time Sergey comes to visitLevin at his estate.  As always, the two spend most of theirtime in friendly argument.  These chapters are interesting,particularly for what they show you about Levin's intellectualand spiritual development.  You might contrast the ways in whichKitty and Levin struggle toward self-knowledge.   Conversations between Levin and Sergey center on thepeasants.  Sergey, a city dweller, has a rather romanticizedview of them, and when he talks it often seems that he likespeasants more than Levin does.  This irks Levin--he thinksSergey is talking through his hat, since he has never workedwith peasants.   Lately, Levin has been struck that Sergey's strictlyintellectual approach to things is dry, lacking "heart." Levinhas spent much of his time studying and has always felt afrustration at his apparent inability to find the answers forwhich he was searching.  Levin is beginning to realize that forhim the path to knowledge cannot be just an intellectual path.   Levin also resents Sergey's poetic descriptions of thecountryside.  To Levin, they only indicate how little Sergeyunderstands nature.  He seems naive about the inherentfierceness in nature, its kill-or-be-killed aspects, its awesomefertility.  Levin has the impression that, to Sergey, nature islittle more than a pretty scene.   Levin and Sergey's final argument has to do with the zemstvo.You recall that earlier Sergey was disappointed that Levin hadstopped participating in the council.  To Sergey the zemstvosrepresent the noblemen helping the peasants out of puregoodness, with no thought for themselves.  Levin takes the linethat no good can come of actions that are not based onself-interest.  Sergey is horrified at the apparent selfishnessin this comment, and to contradict Levin brings up theemancipation of the serfs as an example of the nobility helpingthe peasants with no thought of gain.  Levin has a differentview:  He believes that the emancipation helped everyone--thatthe serfs' bondage was a "yoke" oppressing peasants and noblemenalike.  To Sergey, the emancipation was an act of charity; toLevin, it was the (tardy) execution of justice.   NOTE:  ON RURAL LIFE AND BOOK LEARNING Tolstoy works twothemes into the conversations between Levin and Sergey:  therelation between peasants and nobles; and the role of booklearning in one's development.   Remember that Russia had always been a country with a strictclass system.  Tolstoy believes that the aristocrats have aresponsibility to use their wealth and property in ways thatwill benefit not only themselves, but Russia as a whole.Because Tolstoy believes that serfdom--in which one personessentially owns others--is wrong, he feels that the nobles hadto give it up.  In this way, they purify their own lives as wellas the general atmosphere of Russia.  Obviously, Tolstoy makesthese points through Levin.   Sergey's book learning is impressive, but he can't back uphis political theories with personal experience.  He loves theidea of serving on a zemstvo, but he's never done it and so isignorant of the practicalities (and hassles) involved.   Sergey loves the idea of nature, but he would never go outand work in the fields.  He loves the idea of men working theland, but he's never smelled the stench of their--or hisown--sweat, nor has he a gut feeling for the satisfaction youcan get from growing your own food.   Notice that Levin, in emphasizing the importance of personalexperience, shares Kitty's perspective.  Perhaps little bylittle the two are working their way toward one another.   Do you think that both Levin and Sergey are sincere?  Whoseopinion do you think is more trustworthy?  Why?   Have you ever had to change your mind about something--asport, politics, or falling in love--because the realitydiffered markedly from the expectations you had derived fromreading about these experiences beforehand? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS IV-VI   This is the famous mowing scene, one of Tolstoy's greatestset pieces.  You probably remember that a set piece is a verytheatrical scene presented in minute detail.  In the mowingscene you come to understand Levin's complex and richrelationship with his land and the peasants who work for him.Levin not only works with the peasants side by side, but helearns from them, admires their stamina, skill, and naturalgrace.   You can read the mowing scene as expressing everything Levinhad wished to say to Sergey but couldn't, because to articulatehis feelings would have been to intellectualize them, to robthem of "heart." Sergey has a driving need to describe, Levin toexperience.  Although Sergey may appear better able to share histhoughts and feelings with others, this doesn't mean histhoughts are any deeper than Levin's.  Levin (and Tolstoy) wouldhave you believe they are more shallow.   Savor the mowing scene.  It has some of the most wonderfullydescriptive language to be found in any of Tolstoy's work.  Andit's a rare sort of scene, for it's an unusual writer who reallyknows how to mow a field.  And a rarer one still who can makehis readers yearn to scythe as well. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS VII-XI   The Oblonskys' financial picture is still bleak.  To cut downon expenses and to get a rest from the city, Dolly and herchildren move to her family's estate, which is located nearLevin's.  Like many of Tolstoy's characters, Dolly regains herequilibrium in the country.  Her husband's infidelities bruiseher less there, and she finds increased happiness with herchildren.   Dolly tells Levin that Kitty will be coming for a visit.Levin says that he will not come to call, that he's tried andwill continue to try to forget Kitty.  But one evening he's outwalking and sees a carriage coming his way.  He peers inside asit passes, and his eyes meet Kitty's.  He realizes that he lovesher and always will.   Again Tolstoy has pulled a fast one.  He uses abrupt changesfor two reasons:  They make the plot more exciting, and theyreinforce his theme that our truest perceptions come from ourfeelings rather than our brain.  Levin doesn't have time tointellectualize a denial of his love for Kitty; as soon as hesees her, feelings of love spontaneously wash over him.   Tolstoy "ripens" Levin for this realization.  Before he seesKitty's carriage, Tolstoy has Levin meet a young peasant couple,newly married and very much in love.  They are working togetherin a field, and to Levin they represent the harmony he hungersfor. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XII-XXIII   From a vision of harmony, Tolstoy plunges you into the tensetriangle made up of Anna, Karenin, and Vronsky.   Karenin considers challenging Vronsky to a duel but finallydecides against it.  He then considers divorcing Anna butdecides against that, too, since by Russian law he would have topresent proof of her affair, which would certainly cause ascandal.   Karenin decides that the best thing is for him to insist thathis and Anna's life continue outwardly as though nothing werewrong.  In this way, he reasons, his honor will be saved, hewon't have the headaches of a divorce, and--not least--Anna willsuffer.  Anna, he believes, must suffer, for in his eyes shealone is guilty.   Karenin puts his plan into action by sending Anna money, witha proper but cold note.  He then buries himself in his work.   Anna, who is staying at their summer home and receivingvisits from Karenin on weekends, realizes with a start that shetoo is horrified at the prospect of public disgrace.  By stayingmarried to Karenin maybe she can avoid a scandal and continueher affair with Vronsky.  She seeks advice from Princess Betsy,who counsels her to perfect her arts of deception.  Annarealizes that she feels comfortable in Princess Betsy's drawingroom, that the buzz of society gossip calms her.   Take note that Anna seeks help from a character Tolstoy haslet you know is a villain.  This not only lets you know whatTolstoy thinks of Anna's behavior, but might be a clue as towhat eventually will happen to Anna.   Vronsky has his frustrations, too.  He dislikes situationsthat are unclear, and Anna's apparent inability to leave Kareninmakes him very uncomfortable.  Another unresolved aspect of hislife is his career.  He is by nature ambitious, and he is notprogressing as quickly as he had expected.  He meets an oldschool friend whose career is going along brilliantly.  Vronskytakes special note when his friend tells him that women are thechief stumbling blocks in a man's career.  Vronsky worries thathe might be ruining his chances for success by hanging on to alove that is doomed.   Karenin, Anna, and Vronsky are all trying to act in their ownself-interest.  How different their understanding of this isthan Levin's.  Tolstoy is drawing a line between selfishness andself-interest.  How would you differentiate between the two?Think back to Levin's discussion with Sergey on the emancipationof the serfs. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXIV-XXXII   These chapters, though not especially action-packed, arenonetheless exciting, for they let you see the manner in whichLevin's thoughts--on life and on his part in life--begin tocrystallize with startling speed.   He goes to visit his friend, Sviazhsky, who lives aconsiderable distance away.  En route, he stops to feed hishorses at the home of a wealthy peasant family.  Levin talkswith the head of the family and learns that he is in thepractice of renting land to other peasants and taking apercentage of their crop yield.  His conversation with the oldman haunts him during his trip.  Can you guess why?  Review whatyou already know about Levin's project to revolutionizefarming.   Levin is nervous about seeing Sviazhsky and his wife, for heknows that they would like him to marry the wife's youngersister.  At dinner, the young woman is wearing a low-cut dress,probably to capture Levin's attention.  Levin is distracted,made miserable by the sight of the woman's plunging neckline.This points up his (and Tolstoy's) discomfort with sensualityunless it is in the context of marriage.   Levin excuses himself from the ladies and joins the men for adiscussion on farming methods.  Everyone has complaints.Sviazhsky considers Russia a doomed country.  The nobility, heasserts, really favors serfdom, which he sees as a fatal flaw inthe Russian social make-up.  He says that every year he shows aloss because, even after emancipation, the peasants don't feelthey have enough stake in the system to work hard.  Anotherman--an old-fashioned type of landlord--believes the serfs werebetter off before emancipation.  He says they are too ignorantto be able to fend for themselves.   Levin responds by arguing that the solution is to cure nottheir ignorance first but their poverty.  He concludes that theonly way to do this is to share all profits equally with thepeasants--thereby giving them a vested interest.  As a result,he says, everyone's income will increase.  Levin realizes thatwhat bothered him about the old peasant's practice of rentingland to other peasants is that it is too similar to the waythings were done in the past--it's still a landlord-tenantrelationship.  Levin wants a full partnership with the peoplewho work for him.   He vows to start this new system on his estate that veryseason.  He goes home and begins working feverishly.   NOTE:  In the late 1840s (the emancipation happened in 1861),Tolstoy tried to make the peasants at Yasnaya Polyana hispartners by selling them bits of land.  Although the peasantsliked Tolstoy personally, they couldn't understand why alandlord would do such a thing.  Crestfallen at his failure,Tolstoy returned to Moscow and spent 1848-1850 there.  But afteremancipation, Tolstoy made it work.   Levin's life as an estate proprietor is based on Tolstoy'sexperience as a landlord.   Nicholas arrives unexpectedly, saying that his health is muchimproved.  Clearly, though, he is worse--he is dying.  Levinrealizes with a jolt that his discomfort with Nicholas hasstemmed from the fact that for a long time now he had associatedNicholas with death.  Levin is terribly depressed.  He takescomfort in the thought that maybe his work--if it's good enoughto live on after him--will, in a sense, save him from death.   It will pay to read these chapters a second time.  AnnaKarenina is not only about the lives of the characters--it isabout Tolstoy's view of, and vision for, Russia.  Levin is hisspokesman.  You see, through Levin, Tolstoy's owndevelopment--his intellectual false starts, crash landings, andfinal soaring. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK I, PART IV   The events in Part IV--the last part in Book I--mark aturning point in the novel.  After giving birth to Vronsky'sdaughter, Anna becomes gravely ill.  Karenin forgives her onwhat he believes to be her deathbed.  When she recovers,however, he realizes that Anna despises him, and consents to adivorce.  Anna refuses the divorce because she doesn't want togive up her son, but goes to live abroad with Vronsky.   Kitty and Levin become engaged. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-XVI   Anna and Karenin live together as though nothing were wrong.Of course, Anna continues to see Vronsky, and Karenin knows it.His one condition is that Vronsky never come to their house.   One night, however, Anna begs Vronsky to come while Kareninis to be at a meeting.  Karenin comes home unexpectedly, meetsVronsky on his doorstep, and bows to him politely.  But beneathhis polite exterior, he is boiling mad.  Karenin tells Anna heplans to divorce her and to arrange for Seriozha to be raised byhis aunt.   Soon after, Anna tells Vronsky she has had a dream that toldher she will soon die.  It is the dream in which a small peasantfumbles in a sack, muttering, near railway tracks.  This dreamwill recur throughout the rest of the novel.   Why do you think Anna first has the dream after Karenin tellsher they will divorce?  What does divorce mean to Anna, and whydoes she--even subconsciously--connect it to her death?  Youmight think back to the epigraph, and Tolstoy's insistence that"the bitter things come from God." Has Anna set in motion herown destruction by transgressing God's commandments?  You maynot be able to answer at this point in the book, but keep thequestion in mind as you read.   The Oblonskys' finances are as shaky as ever, but Stiva stillentertains his friends at restaurants and gives parties at hishome.  At one of his get-togethers, Levin, who happens to be intown, unexpectedly meets Kitty.  He recognizes that she loveshim by the look in her eyes.  He proposes to her, using secretsignals that only she understands.   Kitty and Levin are able to come together not because onemakes a declaration to the other, but because, as soon as theysee each other, they communicate their feelings by theirexpressions, postures, and so forth.  They relate to one anotherintuitively.   Contrast this harmony between Levin and Kitty with the waysin which words often bring Anna to cross purposes with Vronskyas well as with Karenin.   Also contrast Anna's indecision--her inability to create aclear situation for herself with either Vronsky or Karenin--withLevin's clarity of feeling and decisive action with Kitty.   Levin asks formally for Kitty's hand, although the youngwoman has already accepted him.  The prince and princess areboth delighted.  Take note that Kitty has brought her motheraround to her point of view on Levin.   Levin feels he must ask Kitty's forgiveness for the fact thathe is not a virgin.  He gives her his diary, which recountscertain episodes of his youth.  She reads it and is horrified,but in the end forgives him.   NOTE:  Tolstoy places those women who seem cut out by natureto be wives and mothers on a higher moral plane than otherwomen, to whom such roles in life might seem burdensome.Levin's investing Kitty with the power to forgive and absolvedrives home Tolstoy's point.  The gesture also serves tounderscore that marriage must be sanctified, that one mustprepare and cleanse oneself for it.   What do you think of Levin's confession to Kitty?  Is thissomething you would wish to do?  Would you expect this of yourprospective husband or wife?  Do you think Kitty should haverefused to read the diaries? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XVII-XXIII   Smarting over Anna's betrayal, Karenin thinks about theChristian principle of forgiveness.  But it's hard for him.Just as earlier in the novel Anna had advised Dolly to forgiveStiva, so now Dolly counsels Karenin to forgive Anna.   Karenin receives a telegram from Anna telling him she isdying and asking him to come to her.  He doesn't believe it--shehas lied to him so many times--but he can't help but think thather death would solve all his problems.   When he arrives, Anna, despite having given birth safely to adaughter, is delirious with fever.  She begs Karenin to forgiveher affair with Vronsky and begs him to forgive Vronsky as well.Karenin does.  Now Anna feels ready to die, and wishes fordeath.   Vronsky, humiliated before Karenin and desperate at thethought of Anna's death, attempts to commit suicide.  He shootshimself after he has gone back to his room, but before he bleedsto death his servant finds him and summons help.   Karenin is surprised at the tenderness and compassion hefound within himself--he even feels affection for Anna andVronsky's daughter and vows to raise her himself after Anna'sdeath.  He knows inward peace for the first time in his life.   To Karenin's astonishment, however, Anna begins to recover.His feelings toward her change.  He realizes that Anna fearsrather than loves him.  He receives an unexpected jolt when helearns from Princess Betsy that Vronsky is leaving for a job inthe provinces and that Anna wishes to see him before he leaves.Karenin is back in his old predicament.  He wants to act so thatothers will have no cause to condemn him, but the thought ofpermitting Anna to resume her affair with Vronsky makes hisblood boil.   NOTE:  APPEARANCES CAN BE DECEIVING From a dramatic point ofview, Tolstoy uses the birth of Anna's child and Anna'ssubsequent illness in a highly ironic way.  Karenin's kindnessand Anna's contrition lead you to believe that the two willreconcile.  This is supported by the fact that Vronsky plays avery small role in the deathbed scene.   You've seen Tolstoy do this before.  Just when you think youknow what will happen next, Tolstoy pulls a switch.  Thistechnique keeps you on your toes, but that's not the only reasonTolstoy uses it.  He believes that appearances are oftendeceiving.  Anna is a perfect case in point:  Just before shebegan a torrid love affair with Vronsky, she was the picture ofthe proper, faithful wife of a prominent gentleman.  On thebasis of Anna's past actions and words, no one had any reason tosuspect that she would suddenly (or ever) leave her family.   Princess Betsy, a woman who loves intrigue, takes uponherself the role of go-between.  After telling Karenin aboutVronsky's plans, she goes to see Stiva, telling him that Kareninwill be the death of Anna.  Stiva, concerned for his belovedsister, begs Karenin to give her a divorce.  Deeply upset,Karenin finally agrees.   Princess Betsy goes to Vronsky to tell him the news.  Vronskyimmediately visits Anna, who tells him she belongs to him.  Theydecide to go to Italy to live together.   Vronsky gives up the promising job he was offered, and Annarefuses Karenin's offer of divorce because he refused to granther custody of Seriozha.  The lovers leave, but many matters arestill undecided.   Many readers believe the deathbed scene to be the mostcritical scene in the novel.  Tolstoy is telling you that thenearness of death brings out the best in people.  Anna no longerwants to be deceitful, Karenin is forgiving, Vronsky feelsshame.  Anna's returning health, however, complicates things.Anna goes back to Vronsky, Karenin again feels a thirst forvengeance, and Vronsky devotes himself to a desperate loverather than to a clear-cut, comparatively wholesome life.   At Anna's deathbed, they all seem to exist in a suspendedmoment.  But this is not how life works, and perhaps our truedesires can only be recognized in the crush of everyday life.Do you think we recognize what we really hope for and aspire toin times of crisis? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK II, PART V   A lot happens in Part V.  Kitty and Levin marry in another ofTolstoy's famous set pieces.  They have a rocky adjustment tomarried life.  Nicholas dies just before the newlyweds learnthat Kitty is pregnant.   Anna and Vronsky are also adjusting to life together.  (Fromhere on, you'll want to compare and contrast the relationshipsbetween Kitty and Levin, and Anna and Vronsky.  Remember thatAnna Karenina is as much a novel about domestic relations asanything else.) Anna misses her son terribly and one morning,when she can't stand being apart from Seriozha another day, shesneaks into his nursery.  Desperately lonely--all her formerfriends snub her now that she's "living in sin" withVronsky--she goes to the opera, causing a scandal.  Anna has ahard time keeping her head together in the face of so muchrejection, and begins to blame Vronsky for her unhappiness.  Forhis part, Vronsky is displeased that she would flaunt herself insociety.  Anna and Vronsky are discovering some difficultiesbetween them that will ultimately prove their undoing.  They goto the country to "get away from it all" and for a while aredistracted from the tensions festering between them. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-VI   These chapters deal primarily with Kitty and Levin.  Levinrealizes that Kitty doesn't understand the particulars of hisbook on farming, nor does she care to.  Only knowing that it'simportant to Levin makes it important to her.  Notice that Kittydoesn't wish to share in her husband's work the way Anna wouldwish to share in Vronsky's.  Kitty has a clear idea of what herown work is--to care for her husband and the children she willhave with him.   Stiva tells Levin that in order to be married he will need acertificate of confession.  It's been years since Levin madeconfession.  He doesn't believe in the ritual of confession andcommunion; in fact, he doesn't really believe in God.  But hegoes to see the priest anyway, and confesses that his chief sinis doubt.  The priest asks him how he can doubt the existence ofGod when he looks every day on God's creation.  He asks Levinhow he will answer his children's questions about death, birth,evil, goodness.  Levin realizes that the priest is raising somevalid points.  But he knows that, at present, he still does notbelieve in God.  Nonetheless, deep within him, he feels asthough a voice were telling him to have patience, that faithwill come.   It is Kitty's love that helps prepare Levin for thepossibility he might find faith.  Levin's spiritual search is along and hard one, and he is still closer to its beginning thanto its culmination.   Chapters II-VI are devoted to Kitty and Levin's wedding.Tolstoy describes the hours preceding the ceremony and theritual itself in painstaking detail.  He does this not only fordramatic purposes--a wedding is a highly theatrical event--butto emphasize that Kitty and Levin will live a traditionallyRussian and harmonious life.  Tolstoy cuts back and forthbetween the wedding guests and the couple, splicing--as thoughthis were a film--gossip, criticism of Kitty's appearance, andsmall talk from the crowd with phrases from the marriage vows,prayers, and bits of Levin's running interior monologue.  Thistechnique underscores that weddings are seminal events forsociety--that a wedding is a grand occasion with importance forall who take part in it.  It also emphasizes that Kitty andLevin--because they are fully conscious of marriage as asacrament--are apart from those who participate in the weddingas if it were merely a big party.  Kitty's joy--pure, radiantwith appreciation for the momentousness of the event--infectseveryone, bringing unity (however brief) to all who are there. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS VII-XIII   Tolstoy immediately contrasts Kitty and Levin with Anna andVronsky.  You go directly from the wedding scene to Italy, whereAnna and Vronsky have been living together for three months.Anna feels "unpardonably happy" in her life with Vronsky.  Shefeels that she should be suffering, especially since she hasleft her son behind and ruined her reputation, but she can'tmake herself feel unhappy.   But Vronsky--though loving and attentive--begins to feelbored.  He gave up his career for Anna and really has nothing todo.  He takes up painting, working in traditional styles, andshows considerable skill.  They go to visit a Russian painternamed Mikhaylov, who lives nearby.  They are impressed with theold man's work and Vronsky commissions him to do a portrait ofAnna.  Vronsky gives up painting after admitting to himself thathe hasn't anywhere near the talent of the old Russian, let alonethe Old Masters.  Now he becomes really frustrated and growsincreasingly restless.   NOTE:  THE CREATIVE PROCESS The chapters dealing withMikhaylov, the Russian painter, don't have much to do with theplot of Anna Karenina, but they are nonetheless interesting.   You see the contrasting ways in which an artist and nonartistsee the creative process.  Anna, Vronsky, and their friendGolenishchev--intellectuals--visit the painter at his studio.They are immediately put off by his appearance:  His clothes arebadly out of fashion, and his manner is rough.  By this detail,Tolstoy tells you that the artist is usually out of step withthe fashionable world, that the making of art is not a tidy,genteel activity.   The artist and his visitors have conflicting feelings abouteach other.  Mikhaylov feels some scorn for Golenishchev,Vronsky, and Anna because he suspects they don't know much aboutart but believe they do because they know which artists are invogue and which are not.  Yet he wants them to say somethingintelligent about his work, something that will convince himthat they do understand.  Why?  Because as an artist, Mikhaylovdesperately wants his work to communicate.   Golenishchev, Vronsky, and Anna talk about technique asthough it were all-important.  To Mikhaylov, technique issecondary to the making of art.  For Mikhaylov, what counts mostis inspiration and the artist's faithfulness to his own vision.Tolstoy is talking through Mikhaylov.   Notice that Anna is content to bury herself in a sort ofnever-never land of romance, while Vronsky feels an increasingdiscomfort at living removed from his own society.  Why isromance alone not enough to override these shortcomings inVronsky's life?  If you were in Anna's place, would you becompletely satisfied with your life?  If not, why not? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XIV-XX   These are important chapters.  Levin must finally confrontwhat haunts him when Nicholas dies--his horror of death.   Kitty and Levin's first several months of marriage find themquarreling a lot, much to their surprise.  Their fights areproductive, though, for after each one they understand eachother better and feel closer than before.   Just when things are beginning to settle down between them,the two receive a telegram from Masha, saying that Nicholas isdying.  Levin is astonished when Kitty insists on going with himto Moscow.   Levin is upset--to the point of inaction--by the seediness ofNicholas's hotel, by his brother's suffering and nearness todeath, and by the presence of Masha, a "fallen woman." But Kittyknows instinctively what to do.  She has Nicholas moved to abetter room, has it cleaned, puts fresh linen on the bed, washesand changes Nicholas, and convinces him to take extreme unction.To Levin's surprise, Kitty and Masha get along well.   You see clearly the contrast between Levin and Kitty--or, asTolstoy would have you understand it, between the intellectualand intuitive approach to life.  Levin tries intellectually tocome to terms with death and suffering.  That is why he fails.Kitty--Tolstoy's consummate wife and mother in this novel--hasan intuitive understanding that birth and death are part of thesame cycle, that both have their particular significance.  Levinsees that he must try to learn from Kitty.  He realizes thatlove--not work, as he had previously thought--will keep him fromdespair.   Nicholas dies an agonizing death in Chapter XX, the onlychapter in Anna Karenina to have a title ("Death").  Soonafterward, Levin learns that Kitty is pregnant.  The timing ofthese two events underscores Tolstoy's theme that death andbirth are united, and that a person must come to terms withboth. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXI-XXX   You remember that Karenin had decided that the best way forhim to handle his life was to continue his normal routine asmuch as possible.  But the routine doesn't make him feel anybetter about things.  He is completely lost; his life makes nosense to him.  He can't understand how he can still love Anna,feel tenderness for her and Vronsky's daughter, do his best(with his limited emotional resources) to raise his son--andstill be ridiculed by many in society.   He's easy prey for Lydia Ivanovna, a society lady given toimpulsive love affairs and religious faddism.  She arrives atKarenin's home and announces that she will run his house andadvise him on all personal matters.  Though Karenin hadpreviously had contempt for Lydia Ivanovna, he feels sodesperate that he is comforted by her attention.  The firstthing the woman does to set Karenin's house in order is to tellSeriozha that his mother is dead.  From here on, Lydia will doeverything in her power to hurt Anna, and to make Karenin fallin love with herself.   Others in society are also trying to destroy Anna.  PrincessBetsy, pretending to offer friendly advice, tells Vronsky thathe shouldn't be seen with Anna, a "fallen woman," while they arein Saint Petersburg.  She talks to Vronsky in honeyed tones,appealing to his insecurities about his career and chances forsuccess.  Princess Betsy also visits Anna, under the guise offriendship.  She tells Anna that she herself, of course, is veryliberal and is not bothered by Anna and Vronsky's livingtogether, but that others are not so open-minded.  She does thisjust so she can see the effect of her painful words on Anna.   Anna's reaction is to rebel even further.  She sneaks intoKarenin's house in order to see Seriozha.  The visit completelyunnerves her, especially when she realizes the boy had been toldshe was dead.  When she goes back home, she can no longer feellove for her daughter, and never will again.  In her mind, herdaughter has deprived her of Seriozha, and she resents her forit.   Hysterical beneath a relatively calm exterior, Anna startsacting in a way that Vronsky considers reckless.  He has beeninfluenced by Princess Betsy's talk and wants them to keep a lowprofile in Saint Petersburg.  Anna, however, announces that sheis going to the opera that evening; Vronsky can barely containhis horror.   Vronsky also goes to the opera, but sits apart from Anna.  Hefeels angry that she is so beautiful--her loveliness, he can'thelp thinking, is what got him into this mess in the firstplace.  Anna's presence at the opera does, in fact, cause ascandal.  The people in the next box leave rather than sit nextto a "sinful woman."   Anna and Vronsky fight at home after the opera.  Anna blamesVronsky for leaving her alone too much.  They make a tentativepeace and leave the next day for the country.   Vronsky shows himself to resemble Karenin in his concernabout the opinion of others.  Anna again finds that she is witha man who is unable to think and act independently.   Tolstoy shows urban society at its most hypocritical.  Mostof the people who now scorn Anna are themselves adulterers.  Butthey do it secretly, playing by "the rules." Who do you think ismore dishonorable--Anna or those that condemn her?   Anna's mind starts to slip in these chapters.  She fantasizesthat Vronsky no longer loves her, and begins acting as thoughher fantasy were true.  More and more, Anna will be unable totell the difference between what she imagines and what really ishappening.  As you read, try to pinpoint the events andcircumstances that drive Anna mad. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK II, PART VI   In this part, Tolstoy shows in high relief the differences inthe lives of his three principal female characters.  The Levins'quiet life in the country is interrupted by visitors from thecity.  Not only does Levin's work suffer, but he finds himselfjealous of the attention one of the guests shows to Kitty.Dolly goes to visit Anna and realizes that though her own lifeis far from perfect, she wouldn't want to be in Anna's shoes.Anna, resisting the role of wife and uncomfortable with that ofmistress, is increasingly in need of Vronsky's undividedattention. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-VII   The Levins' house is filled with summer guests, among themKoznyshev and Varenka, a pretty young woman.  Koznyshev youlearn, had a fiancee who died before they could marry.  Sincethen, he has remained true to her.  But he's lonely andattracted to Varenka.  Just as he is about to propose, though,he backs down, to the chagrin of both of them.   NOTE:  INTELLECTUALS AND MARRIAGE Again Tolstoy expresses atheme through a particular character, Tolstoy is emphasizingthat the only way a man can be truly happy is to be happilymarried.  Koznyshev, an intellectual, is faithful more to aprinciple than to his young fiancee, who, of course, is no more.It is the idea of his faithfulness that he can't give up--hislife with her was ended, after all.  He prefers to be miserablebut true to his idea than to change and be happier.   Notice how Tolstoy takes a seemingly unimportant, thoughdiverting, scene involving minor characters, some of whom appearonly once, and uses it to make a thematic statement.  In thisway, Tolstoy expresses his themes in various contexts and fromseveral different angles (Sergey is one type of unfulfilledintellectual, Koznyshev is another).  An advantage to the epicform is that it gives authors lots of room:  they can explorethe many ramifications of a given theme without seeming tohammer away at it.  The epic also allows authors to changescenes and bring in new characters, to keep the story lively aswell as to deepen the treatment of their themes.   Stiva arrives with a friend named Veslovsky.  Levin isoffended that Veslovsky flirts with Kitty.  Later Veslovsky willvisit Vronsky and Anna, and flirt with Anna.  The two womenrespond differently to Veslovsky's attentions, and so do Levinand Vronsky.  You'll want to compare and contrast the twocouples and their reactions to an intrusive third party. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS VIII-XV   These chapters comprise another set piece.  Levin, Stiva, andVeslovsky go hunting.  Levin is annoyed by the two citygentlemen who have little appreciation for the land and thepeasants.  They stop for the night at a peasant's home.  Stivaand Veslovsky each go to bed with a peasant girl.  Levin sleepsalone, furious with his companions.   He comes around to thinking that he really has no right tojudge others, as long as they don't prevent him from living ashe chooses.  By the end of the trip, the three are back onfriendly terms.   But when they get back to Levin's estate, Veslovsky againflirts with Kitty, whereupon Levin tells him to leave.  Levin'sfamily considers his gesture extreme.  But Levin doesn't care,he has what he wants--peace and quiet.   There's something else.  Levin regards Kitty as exalted, aspractically sacred because she is pregnant.  To him Veslovsky is"the worm in the Garden of Eden," and he won't have his homecontaminated.  What do you think of Levin's conduct here?Remember, Levin is struggling to achieve greater clarity in hislife.  Levin's gesture can be seen either as heroic--in that hemakes a clear statement on his moral standards--or a littleparanoid.  What do you think? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XVI-XXV   The main purpose of this chapter is the contrast between Annaand Dolly.  Dolly goes to see Anna where she is living withVronsky.  Dolly is nervous because she looks shabby, althoughshe's wearing her best dress.  Anna, as always, looks beautifuland is glad to see Dolly, but somehow they have trouble talking.Dolly feels sad to realize that Vronsky has a lot ofactivities--a stud farm, a hospital he has built for hispeasants, a park--that Anna doesn't share.  It seems her job isalways to look stunning--she changes clothes several times aday.  Anna doesn't even plan menus or oversee the houseservants; Vronsky does that.  Anna, it seems to Dolly, is aguest in Vronsky's home rather than a full-fledged companion.   Vronsky takes Dolly aside and asks her to convince Anna toget a divorce.  He would like to have more children with Annaand knows that they would legally be considered bastards unlesshe and Anna marry.   Veslovsky, the man Levin threw out of his house, comes fordinner.  Dolly is shocked to see Anna flirting with him.Vronsky, unlike Levin, isn't the least bit upset.  In fact, heseems flattered that another man would notice Anna's charms.   As they prepare for bed, Anna comes in to talk with Dolly.Dolly prevails upon Anna to get a divorce from Karenin.  Anna'sreply shocks her.  Anna says that she does not want to have morechildren--that she practices birth control (highly unusual forthose times).  She tells Dolly that she knows if she isn'teternally alluring to Vronsky he will leave her.  To becomepregnant, to be burdened with the tasks of child rearing, would,she fears, take away from her sexual attractiveness.  She feelsinsecure because she's not married to Vronsky, but she's afraidof being like Dolly.  Vronsky has said that Dolly is "nice, butterre a terre," which means that she's too down to earth.Either way, Anna fears losing Vronsky, and so tries to staybetween the two roles.   After Dolly leaves, you get another look at Anna andVronsky's life together.  Anna is bored.  To occupy herself, shereads voraciously, trying to keep up on subjects of interest toVronsky.  Vronsky feels increasingly confined in their life.  Hehas become active politically and spends a lot of time away fromAnna at meetings.  They fight frequently about this.  Anna isnearly out of her mind with loneliness.  Vronsky resolves hewill give Anna anything she wants except his "freedom as aman."   NOTE:  LOVE AND ROMANCE Tolstoy condemns Anna not because shelives unconventionally, but because her refusal to have childrenmeans she has turned her back on her rightful place in the lifecycle.  Tolstoy believes that the purpose of love is to begetchildren.  Romance can exist within love--look at Kitty andLevin--but love can't flower within a strictly romanticrelationship.  Anna yearns for love but will neither give up thetrappings of romance nor accept love's obligations.   You may notice that there is a lot of French in this section.This is one way in which Tolstoy lets you know that hedisapproves of Anna and Vronsky's set-up.  Remember, speakingFrench was a habit among upper-class Russians who wished to act"cultivated."   What do you think of Tolstoy's definition of love and thedistinction he draws between love and romance?  What do youthink of Vronsky's attitude?  Anna is trapped.  What do youthink Anna could do in order to free herself?   Dolly goes home feeling that her own life has integrity.  Itmay be hard for readers in this day and age to accept Tolstoy'ssolution for Dolly.  Many readers find that Dolly is toolong-suffering, has borne too much humiliation, to be anadmirable female character.  But bear in mind that Tolstoy'spoint is not that women should suffer (and he makes clear thatStiva is far from an ideal husband); his point is that a woman'schief responsibility, and joy, is to have children.  Dolly'slife isn't perfect, but she does find happiness in it. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXVI-XXXII   Anna and Vronsky and Kitty and Levin are again contrasted inthese chapters.  Both couples are separated--the women are athome, the men are at an election conference.   Vronsky's frequent separations from Anna have her feeling sodesperate she takes morphine every night in order to sleep.Kitty is with her family in Moscow, peacefully awaiting thebirth of her child.   Levin and Vronsky find themselves opposed on most of theissues raised at the conference.  Vronsky represents a new breedof farmer, one who doesn't shy away from modern methods, whodoesn't see any harm in industrializing farming.  Though Vronskydoesn't mistreat his peasants, it doesn't occur to him to makethem equal partners.  Levin doesn't want to see farming becomean industry.  He holds more than ever to his plan to forge apartnership with the peasants.   In the midst of the meeting, Vronsky receives a note fromAnna saying that their daughter is very ill.  He returns home,finding that the baby was never as seriously ill as Anna triedto make him believe.  Vronsky is furious that she would try tomanipulate him so crudely.   Anna feels so desperately insecure that she writes to Kareninasking for a divorce on any terms.  Then she and Vronsky move toMoscow and set up housekeeping like a married couple, expectingany day to receive news from Karenin that a divorce is underway.   Both couples are anticipating major changes:  Kitty and Levinare preparing to become parents; Anna and Vronsky to becomemarried.  Again on a note of suspense, Tolstoy closes a Part ofthe novel. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK II, PART VII   Many readers find this the most exciting part of AnnaKarenina.  Kitty gives birth.  Karenin has a "religiousconversion," falls under the sway of a fake clairvoyant (afriend of Lydia Ivanovna), and refuses to divorce Anna.  Annacommits suicide. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-XII   By now the Levins have been in Moscow two months waiting forKitty to give birth.  Levin, although he doesn't particularlylike city life and is worried that things are very expensive, ismuch more at ease in town than ever before.  The "rough edges"in his character that earlier caused him to throw Veslovsky outof his house seem to have been smoothed.  He renewsacquaintances with some of his college friends, and enjoystalking with them about his ideas on agriculture.   One night while at his father-in-law's club, Levin isintroduced by Stiva to Vronsky.  The two men find that theyrather like each other and are both glad that the unspoken feudbetween them is over.   Vronsky even invites Levin to his home.  Kitty, too, meetsVronsky by chance while out walking with her father.  Like herhusband, she feels none of the hostility toward him she felt inthe past.  Both Kitty and Levin are learning to put their pastsbehind them.   Levin goes with Stiva to Anna and Vronsky's home.  Annabeguiles Levin with her charm, intelligence, and wit.  But shestartles him when, as he's leaving, she asks him to give herregards to Kitty, saying, "If she cannot forgive me mysituation, I wish her never to forgive me.  To forgive, shewould have to live through what I have lived through, and mayGod preserve her from that!"   The scene between Anna and Levin is complex.  They are drawnto each other, which underscores that Tolstoy places them on ahigher plane than he does his other characters.  They are bothseekers; neither is satisfied to live an unexamined lifedictated by society.   But Anna flirts with Levin, and her mention of Kitty isshifty.  She raises the possibility that Kitty could end upwhere Anna has; she raises the possibility of infidelity,divorce, ruined reputations.   This not only serves to emphasize that Levin and Anna--forall they share--are essentially different, but foreshadowsAnna's ruin.  Levin is the hero of this book; no principalcharacter can cross him and have a happy life.   After Levin and Anna's meeting both couples argue.  Kittynotices that Levin has an uncommon gleam in his eye and isafraid that her husband has fallen in love with Anna.  Aftertalking about it all night, they fall asleep, totallyreconciled.  It's different with Anna and Vronsky.  Vronsky'sbeen away a lot and this makes Anna insecure.  She thinks thatshe's more attractive to other men--she knows the effect she hadon Levin--than to her lover.  In order to get Vronsky to paymore attention to her, she tells him she is "near disaster andafraid of myself." Anna can't help herself; she feels that an"evil spirit of strife" exists side by side with their love, notonly in her heart but in his as well.  This "spirit of strife"seems bigger than both Anna and Vronsky.  Do you think it is oneof "the bitter things from God" to which the epigraph refers? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XIII-XVII   These chapters are devoted to the birth of Kitty and Levin'sbaby.  To Levin, it seems that everything is happening in adream.  Kitty, although this is her first child and she is inpain, has an intuitive comprehension and feels peaceful.  Whenhe sees his newborn son at Kitty's breast, Levin is astonishedat his feelings:  He feels pain, because he knows that hisson--being human--is destined to suffer.   NOTE:  TOLSTOY ON CHILDBIRTH Scholars say that Tolstoy wrotethe single most elaborate childbirth scene (five chapters!) inthe history of literature to his time.  He clearly did so tounderscore a strong belief that childbirth is a momentousoccasion.  He also develops his theme that women are in touchwith the awesome processes of life to a far greater degree thanmen.  That Kitty is surrounded by her family during herpregnancy as well as during childbirth highlights Tolstoy'stheme that marriages exist primarily for the creation ofchildren, that the primary purpose of sex is not personalpleasure but procreation.   Tolstoy places this scene as rebuttal to the views that Annaexpressed to Dolly on pregnancy and motherhood. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XVIII-XXII   Here you get a glimpse of Tolstoy's nightmare vision of thefuture:  an industrialized and bureaucratized Russia.   You remember that the Oblonskys' finances are in bad shape.Things are worse than ever, and Stiva decides he must takedrastic means to improve them.  He applies for a well-payingbureaucratic post, membership on the Committee of the JointAgency of the Mutual Credit Balance of Southern Railways andBanking Houses.  Stiva starts talking to all his friends (andfriends of friends) in government.   NOTE:  RAILROADS AND FARMING Tolstoy deplored the rise of thetypes of committees to which Stiva wants to belong.  He feltsure that a bureaucracy would ruin Russia.  Cooperation betweenrailroads and banks was especially worrisome to Tolstoy, for heknew that farmlands would have to be destroyed to buildrailroads.   This would be devastating on two accounts, believed Tolstoy.Agriculture had always been the mainstay of the Russian economy,and the farming life the backbone of Russian tradition.  Tolstoybelieved that Russian peasants were different from the peasantsin European countries, because they believed that their destinywas to inhabit the vast, sparsely populated lands in the eastand south.  To build railroads in those regions would not onlydestroy the practice of farming, but a part of the Russianpsyche as well.   Karenin agrees to help Stiva get the job he wants.  Why doyou think this is?  After all, Stiva has been asking Karenin todivorce Anna, something he doesn't want to do.   Stiva, while visiting with Karenin and other friends in SaintPetersburg, learns that Karenin has fallen under the influenceof a man named Landau, a so-called clairvoyant who has takensociety by storm.  One of the socialites went so far as to adopthim and give him the title of Count Bezzubov.  Karenin asksStiva to meet him later that evening at Countess Lydia's; there,he says, he will give him his decision on divorcing Anna.   Lydia tells Stiva about Karenin's religious "conversion,"letting him know that Karenin's decision will be dependent onLandau's advice.  They enter a particularly weird scene.  Landaugoes into a trance listening for voices, uttering strangephrases.  Suddenly, Landau says that Stiva must leave.  The nextmorning Stiva receives a note from Karenin saying that a divorceis impossible.   Tolstoy's contempt for Karenin and Countess Lydia and hercrowd couldn't be made more plain.  That they could be taken inby a fake like Landau--that they could lionize him--points upthat they have no genuinely religious feelings.  Karenin isusing "religion" to justify his desire to punish Anna; he foolshimself into thinking that he has piously turned himself over toa higher power.  The seance scene shows Karenin to be not onlypathetic and self-deceiving, but spiteful and cruel.  Thinkabout the ways in which Tolstoy develops Karenin as anessentially weak individual.  Trace his decline.   Think back to this scene later when Levin has his spiritualrevelation.  You'll want to contrast the two men and the ways inwhich they deal with religion. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS XXIII-XXXI   This is the end of Anna.  In writing Anna's final hours,Tolstoy is at the height of his dramatic and descriptivepowers.   Anna is at her wit's end.  She's exceedingly lonely, nervous,impatient for her divorce, distrustful of Vronsky, wildlyjealous.  She has convinced herself that he is in love withPrincess Sorokina who is a sort of secretary to his mother.   Vronsky is also at the end of his rope.  Anna is verydifficult to live with.  He continues to go to the theater,opera, concerts, and so forth, even though Anna cannot go withhim.  Do you think Vronsky is merely being cruel?  Do you thinkhe's being cowardly in not taking Anna with him when he goesout?  Do you think that the only way he can keep his head abovewater is to get away from Anna from time to time?   After another fight, Anna and Vronsky decide to return to thecountry.  Vronsky has one item of business he must attend to.When Anna realizes that he'll have to see Princess Sorokina inthe process she creates a terrible scene.   The next day Anna says she won't be ready to go to thecountry.  This is typical of the sudden reversals that have cometo characterize her actions.  The same day Stiva sends Vronsky anote saying the prospect isn't good regarding Anna's divorce.Vronsky tries to comfort Anna by saying that she and thechildren they will have together mean everything to him.  Annareplies that his mention of children means he gives no thoughtto her.  Anna is being impossible, yet Vronsky does his best toremain cool and polite.  Anna misinterprets his reserve for icyhatred.   After he leaves, Anna makes up cruel things he might havesaid to her and believes them.  She goes to bed with a headache,directing a servant to tell Vronsky she prefers not to bedisturbed.  She then tells herself, "If he comes to my room, hestill loves me; if not, he doesn't." This is totally irrational.Vronsky, respecting what he believes are her wishes, goes to bedalone in his study.   That night she has her nightmare again of the man near therailroad tracks.   The next day Princess Sorokina drops by with some papers forVronsky to sign.  Anna flies into a rage and again refuses to gowith Vronsky to the country.  Vronsky, not knowing how to dealwith Anna's unreasonable behavior, leaves the house.   Anna sends him a note begging forgiveness, but the messengerdoesn't get there in time.  Anna sends the servant to Vronsky'smother's home.  She then goes to Dolly's house where she meetsKitty.  Anna immediately thinks that Vronsky regrets not havingmarried Kitty.  She deliberately tells Kitty how much sheenjoyed meeting Levin, hoping to make her jealous.  But Anna isso obviously unhappy that Kitty can only feel sorry for her.Hastily, Anna leaves.   At home Anna receives a telegram from Vronsky saying that hewon't be home until ten o'clock.  She's furious and resolves togo to his mother's to meet him.  She doesn't realize that hehadn't received her note when he wired, and that he doesn't knowwhat she's feeling.   In the carriage on the way to the train station, Anna tellsherself silly jokes, torments herself with thoughts of Vronsky'ssupposed infidelities, with thoughts of her husband and son.She forgets why she is going to the station.  Her servantreminds her.   She boards the train thinking that she has finally learnedthe key to life:  All people are born to suffer, life is nothingbut a torment.   When she arrives at the station where she will have to changetrains, she receives a note from Vronsky apologizing that hernote didn't reach him earlier.  No matter, Anna is burningmad.   All she can think of is her desire to punish Vronsky.  Shekneels down so that the train car will run over her, then triesto get up, but it's too late.   NOTE:  THE DEATH OF ANNA KARENINA In her final moments, Annasinks to Karenin's level:  Both of these characters are drivenby their desire for revenge.  Some readers feel that this isTolstoy's strongest condemnation of Anna.   You should also give some thought to the fact that Anna triedat the last moment to run from death.  You know that Tolstoybelieves that birth-life-death constitute one positive cycle.Anna twice tries to put herself outside this cycle--by herrefusal to have children with Vronsky and by thinking of herdeath as a means to do harm to Vronsky.  Anna has no trace ofKitty's intuitive understanding with the life cycle and none ofthe tough-mindedness that Levin shows as he grapples with hisfear of death.   Try to look at Anna's death from all angles.  To what extentdo you think Anna's society is responsible for her downfall?  Towhat extent is Vronsky responsible?  How does Anna bring abouther own misfortune?  Her refusal of Karenin's first offer ofdivorce can be seen two ways:  either she refuses because shewants a better deal, i.e., custody of Seriozha; or because shefeels so guilty toward Karenin that she wants to punishherself.   One can't deny that Anna suffers because of the way herformer friends reject her, but her greatest suffering is due tothe turmoil within her.  This seems to refer to the epigraph.   Notice how Tolstoy's descriptions of Anna grow increasinglydetailed and lush in this section.  He kills her off, but indoing so he seems to be killing a part of himself as well.Tolstoy may have intended to punish Anna, but his compassionequals his disapproval.  What about you?  What do you feel forAnna Karenina? ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  BOOK II, PART VIII   In this part, Tolstoy steps back from the lives of certain ofhis characters and deals with them as though they were bitplayers in the epic story of Russia.  Because of the politicalcontent, Tolstoy's original publisher refused to print this partof the novel.  He summarized it in a prose section entitled"What Happened After the Death of Anna Karenina." A crucialevent in this part is Levin's religious illumination.  This isimportant in personal terms because Levin is the hero of thebook, and in larger terms because Levin represents Tolstoy'shope for the future of Russia. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS I-V   Tolstoy launches right into the Slavic question--you recallthat in 1875 the Slavs living in the Ottoman Empire revoltedagainst the Turks' discrimination against them.  A good numberof Russians supported fighting on behalf of the Slavs.   Take careful note of which characters support the Slaviccause.  Sergey, Levin's very intellectual half-brother (youremember his and Levin's arguments on the zemstvos and thepeasants earlier in the novel) joined the cause after the bookhe'd been working on for years got terrible reviews and soldpoorly.  Stiva, who is doing his best to maneuver his way intogovernment, also supports the Russian campaign.  Vronsky, too,is a supporter.   Again there is a scene at a train station.  Vronsky, youlearn, was next to death himself after Anna's suicide.  He seemsto be going to war as an honorable way of committing suicide.Once the stalwart soldier, he now appears feeble, wracked bygrief, and suffering monstrously from, of all things, atoothache.  Tolstoy seems to be making fun of Vronsky here:It's one thing for a soldier to die heroically, quite anotherfor him to suffer a toothache.  You may recall that Tolstoypreviously used Vronsky's strong jaw and even teeth to symbolizehis masculinity.   All of the characters who participate in the Slavic campaignare in some way defeated individuals.  Tolstoy uses them notonly to express his own opposition to Russian involvement in theSlavic war, but to express his belief that men like these willbe the ruin of Russia if allowed to have a strong hand in policymaking. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  CHAPTERS VI-XIX   Sergey goes to visit the Levins, and the scene shifts totheir estate.   The big excitement there is that the baby has begun torecognize those close to him.  Kitty, musing on thisdevelopment, reflects on her husband's restlessness as well.   The more Levin studies, the more lost he feels.  He can'treconcile himself to the fact that when Kitty was in labor heprayed, although he never recognized in himself anythingresembling faith in God.  His mind tells him not to believe inGod, yet somewhere in himself is a longing for faith.   Levin's turning point comes when he has a talk with Theodore,a peasant.  Theodore tells him that one must not live for one'sbelly, but must remember God and live for one's soul.  Levinsees the light--he equates God with goodness, realizing thatgoodness is beyond the chain of cause and effect.  It'simportant that a peasant helped Levin to this realization--itunderscores Levin's full partnership with those who work forhim.   Levin feels euphoric, thinking that he'll never again becross with anyone, that he'll only be kind.  But then he snapsat a peasant, and is made aware that just because he has foundfaith does not mean he'll be perfect.  But in his new state ofgrace, Levin can live with the fact that to be human is to beflawed.   On his way back home, Levin is told that his wife and sonhave gone to the woods.  Suddenly, there is a thunderstorm.  Heis terrified that they might be struck by lightning.  When hereaches them, he finds them drenched but safe.  The storm hassymbolic value:  Remember that Tolstoy has used a stormy sky torepresent the storminess in Levin's soul.  After the rain, thesky is clear.  And water is a traditional symbol ofpurification; it is as though Levin is baptized by the rain.   The final incident in Anna Karenina shows Mitya recognizinghis father.  For the first time, Levin sees that not only is theolder generation constantly thinking of the younger, but thatthe younger thinks also of the older.  It is as if a greatcircle is finally complete. ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  TOLSTOY AT WORK   When Anna Karenina began to appear in the Russian Herald,long galley proofs were sent to Father, which he corrected andrevised...  till the proof sheets were so blotched and blackenedthat...  no one but maman could decipher the black web of signs,transpositions, and deletions.   She would sit up all night making a fresh copy of the wholething.  In the morning the new pages, covered with her smallclear handwriting, would be neatly piled on her table, ready tobe sent back by post "when Lyovochka gets up." But first papahad to take them to his study to look over them "for the lasttime," and by evening it was the same thing all over again:everything had been rewritten and scribbled over.   -Ilya Tolstoy, Tolstoy, My Father, 1971 ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  ON THEMES   Anna Karenina is not a book with a single theme, but manythemes.  We can easily assume that Tolstoy wanted torecapitulate for himself and for his readers everything that heknew about men, women, and life....  In this great summing-up,however, there is no catharsis, no resolution.  For just asAnna's despair intensified but distorted her sensibilities justbefore her suicide, the edge of crisis and conversion sharpenedand deepened Tolstoy's already comprehensive vision of life.And because Tolstoy was morally and artistically no longercapable of simplifying that vision, the many themes of AnnaKarenina resist resolution and coexist only in a fragileequilibrium.   -Ruth Crego Benson, Women in Tolstoy, 1973   The real tragedy of Anna, and of certain characters inHardy's novels who perished like her, is that they areunfaithful to the greater unwritten morality....  All the while,by their own souls they were right.   -D.  H.  Lawrence, as quoted in   D.  H.  Lawrence and Tolstoy:  A Critical Debate,   by Henry Gifford and Raymond Williams, 1959 ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  ON WOMEN   And his attitude toward women...  is one of implacablehostility.  There is nothing he likes so much as to punishthem--unless they are just ordinary women like Kitty....  Is itthe revenge of a man who has not achieved as much happiness ashe is capable of, or the hostility of the spirit toward the"humiliating impulses of the flesh"?  Whatever it is, it ishostility, and very bitter, as in Anna Karenina.   -Maxim Gorky, Lev Tolstoj.  Sobranie socinenija, 1951,   as quoted in Women in Tolstoy   I was sitting downstairs in my study and observing a verybeautiful silk line on the sleeve of my robe.  I was thinkingabout how people get the idea in their head to invent all thosepatterns and ornaments of embroidery, and that there exists awhole world of woman's work, fashions, ideas, by which womenlive.  All that must be very cheerful, and I understood thatwomen could love this and occupy themselves with it.  And, ofcourse, at once my ideas moved to Anna and suddenly that line ofthought gave me a whole chapter.  Anna is deprived of all thesejoys of occupying herself with the woman's side of life, becauseshe is alone.  All women have turned away from her, and she hasnobody to talk to about all that which composes the everyday,purely feminine occupations.   -Leo Tolstoy, as recorded in his wife's diary,   November 20, 1876   How many unforgettable, personal and characteristic feelingsand sensations of Anna Karenina are preserved in our memory--butnot one thought, not one personal, peculiar word exclusively herown, not even about love....  her complete absorption in passionis such that she shields us precisely from intelligence,consciousness, higher selflessness and the unsensual aspect ofthe soul.  Who or what is she beyond love?...  We know nothingof this, or almost nothing....  Yet surely it is possible thatwe see the body and soul, even the "personality" of Frou-Frouwith no less clarity, for Vronsky's horse also has her own"night soul," her elemental-animal face--and this face is one ofthe characters of the tragedy.  If it is true, as someoneaffirms, that Vronsky seems like a stallion in an aide-de-camp'suniform, then his horse seems like a charming woman.  And, notwithout purpose, there emerges an elusive, mysteriously ominousfusion of the "eternally feminine" in the charm of Frou-Frou andAnna Karenina, which later deepens more and more.   -D.  S.  Merezhkovsky,   L.  Tolstoy and Dostoevsky:   Life, Work, Religion, 1912 ^^^^^^^^^^ANNA KARENINA:  ON STRUCTURE AND STYLE   The unity in structure is created not by action and not byrelationships between the characters, but by an innercontinuity.   -Leo Tolstoy, in a letter, January 27, 1878   Two words about Anna Karenina--this is indubitably your bestwork....  The book lacks architectonics.  Two themes notconnected in any way develop in the novel side by side, and theydevelop magnificently.  How I enjoyed the acquaintance of Levinwith Anna Karenina.  You must agree that this is one of the bestepisodes of the novel.  Here the opportunity presented itself totie together all the threads of the story and to provide aunified conclusion.  But you did not want this....  AnnaKarenina will nevertheless remain the best contemporary noveland you the first contemporary writer.   -S.  A.  Rachinsky (a university professor in Moscow   who wrote frequently about literature), 1878   We are not to take Anna Karenine as a work of art; we are totake it as a piece of life.  A piece of life it is.   -Matthew Arnold, "Count Leo Tolstoy," first published   in the Fortnightly Review, December 1887   Tolstoy is the greatest Russian writer of prose fiction.Leaving aside his precursors Pushkin and Lermontov, we mightlist the greatest artists in Russian prose thus:  first,Tolstoy; second, Gogol; third, Chekhov; fourth, Turgenev.  Thisis rather like grading students' papers and no doubt Dostoevskiand Saltykov are waiting at the door of my office to discusstheir low marks....   One discovery that [Tolstoy] made has curiously enough neverbeen noticed by critics.  He discovered--and certainly neverrealized his discovery--he discovered a method of picturing lifewhich most pleasingly and exactly corresponds to our idea oftime.  He is the only writer I know of whose watch keeps timewith the numberless watches of his readers.  All the greatwriters have good eyes, and the "realism," as it is called, ofTolstoy's descriptions, has been deepened by others; and thoughthe average Russian reader will tell you that what seduces himin Tolstoy is the absolute reality of his novels, the sensationof meeting old friends and seeing familiar places, this isneither here nor there.  Others were equally good at vividdescription.  What really seduces the average reader is the giftTolstoy had of endowing his fiction with such time-values ascorrespond exactly to our sense of time.  It is a mysteriousaccomplishment which is not so much a laudable feature of geniusas something pertaining to the physical nature of that genius.This time balance, absolutely peculiar to Tolstoy alone, is whatgives the gentle reader that sense of average reality which heis apt to ascribe to Tolstoy's keen vision.  Tolstoy's prosekeeps pace with our pulses, his characters seem to move with thesame swing as the people passing under our window while we sitreading his book.   No wonder, then, that elderly Russians at their evening teatalk of Tolstoy's characters as of people who really exist,people to whom their friends may be likened, people they see asdistinctly as if they had danced with Kitty and Anna or Natashaat that ball or dined with Oblonski at his favoriterestaurant,...  Readers call Tolstoy a giant not because otherwriters are dwarfs but because he remains always of exactly ourown stature, exactly keeping pace with us instead of passing byin the distance, as other authors do.   -Vladimir Nabokov, Lectures on Russian Literature, 1981   THE END  